1 2 Foreword The regulations that appear in this Student Handbook apply to all undergraduate and graduate students who are enrolled in the different colleges of the University. Upon admission, they agree to abide by these regulations so as to maintain discipline, uphold the good order of the academic community, preserve the fair name of the University, and actualize its Vision-Mission Statement. Aside from norms contained in this Student Handbook, website postings, special manuals for specific purposes, and Help Desk Announcements sent via email are the usual channels by which the University administration informs the student body of official business. The students should consult these channels regularly. The administrative authority of the University is vested on the President of the Institution. The continued attendance of students at De La Salle University subjects them to this authority, conforming to the spirit of the on-going policies set by the academic community. A SEPARATE STUDENT HANDBOOK FOR THE STUDENTS UNDER THE TAÑADA-DIOKNO SCHOOL OF LAW IS PROVIDED. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. PARTS OF THIS MATERIAL MAY BE REPRODUCED PROVIDED: (1) THE MATERIAL IS NOT ALTERED; (2) USE IS NON COMMERCIAL; (3) DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY IS ACKNOWLEDGED AS SOURCE; AND (4) DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY IS NOTIFIED THROUGH (EMAIL). DLSU, 2401 TAFT AVENUE, MANILA 0922 PHILIPPINES. 3 This is to acknowledge receipt of the De La Salle University (DLSU) Student Handbook for Academic Year 2021-2025 _______________________ (Date) Having read and understood the contents of this Student Handbook, I, ___________________________, commit to abide by the provisions stated and to exemplify the Lasallian core values of Faith, Zeal for Service, and Communion in Mission in order to realize the Expected Lasallian Graduate Attributes (ELGAs) and become a resource for God and country. Furthermore, I will abide by the different procedures and processes, including those indicated in the Lasallian Community Standards section. _______________________________________________________ (Signature over Printed Complete Name) College: _____________________ Degree Program: ______________ ID Number: ___________________ Conforme: _______________________________________________________ (Signature over Printed Complete Name) Parents/Guardian Note: Please submit this Acknowledgement Form to the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) of DLSU-Taft Campus or the Laguna campus during the enrollment period or during the Lasallian Personal Effectiveness Program (LPEP). Thank you. 4 5 De La Salle University Student Handbook 2021-2025 Table of Contents Foreword Acknowledgement Receipt Table of Contents Message from the President Our Founder, St. John Baptist de La Salle De La Salle Philippines De La Salle University Lasallian Values and Lasallian Prayers General Provisions Section 1: General Directives Section 2: Student Classification Section 3: Communication Section 4: Social Norms Section 5: Lasallian Community Standards Section 6: Student Grievance Undergraduate Section 7: Fees, Scholarships, and Payments Section 8: Attendance Section 9: Examinations Section 10: Credit, Grading, and Retention Section 11: Trimestral Honors Section 12: Graduation Section 13: Discontinuance of Studies Graduate Section 14: Fees, Scholarships, and Payments Section 15: Enrollment Section 16: Comprehensive Examinations Section 17: Credit, Grading, and Retention Section 18: Thesis and Dissertation II III VI VIII X XII XIV XVI 18 27 35 36 40 76

89 96 100 101 107 109 111 113 118 121 121 128 133 134 136 153 168 170 187 192 206 237 253 258 274 277 285 288 300 304 315 322 324 326 336 337 Section 19: Graduation Section 20: Discontinuance of Studies Section 21: Student Activities Appendices Appendix A: Lasallian Guiding Principles Appendix B: South Manila Educational Consortium (SMEC) Appendix C: Student Sevices and Programs Appendix D: Expected Lasallian Graduate Attributes (ELGA) Appendix E: Office Directory and Campus Layout Appendix F: Undergraduate Student Organizations Appendix G: Students’ Charter Appendix H: DLSU Mental Health Policy Appendix I: DLSU Safe Spaces and Policy Program Appendix J: Zero-Tolerance for All Forms of Violence Policy Appendix K: Digital Citizenship Policy Appendix L: University Attire Policy Appendix M: Policies on Intellectual Property Appendix N: DLSU Policy and Guidelines on The Use of Trademarks Appendix O: Guidelines for the Conduct of the Lasallians’ Fight Against Drugs (LFAD) Drug Testing Program (DTP) Appendix P: Implementing Guidlines for Discipline-Related Policies Appendix Q: Theater Decorum Appendix R: Memorandum on Dropping of Modular Accountancy Courses Appendix S: Student Media Appendix T: List of Relevant Republic Acts and Government Mandated Policies Student Handbook Revision Committee 8 Message from the President Welcome to De La Salle University! Your college journey begins in an ever-evolving academic environment during a very complex period. As the global community continues to shape new norms of living and learning, our University also embarks on new strategies and innovative programs brought about by our experiences of the pandemic years. This year, we reintroduce face-to-face classes on what we call the HyFlex mode, gradually expanding its implementation depending on the prevailing COVID-19 situation. We are delighted to reopen our campuses in Manila and Laguna, as well as in Makati and the Bonifacio Global City in Taguig, not only for our incoming froshies but also for those who are already in their second or third year, who did not get the opportunity for onsite gatherings during the past two years. DLSU’s capability to manage the impacts of the pandemic was the fruit of the technology-enabled or blended learning that we have initiated more than 10 years ago. It has allowed us to successfully shift to online learning, and we continue to build on it today as we provide the most viable and flexible education to our students. We look forward to the day that we will no longer have major disruptions in our mode of learning. Still, whatever the future may bring us, our University underscores its commitment to bring full service to you, our dear students. We expect that you will engage in a high level of collaboration with our faculty for our service-learning and research activities. You can also tap the full range of DLSU’s support services to help you every step of the way. 9 Achievements in the face of challenges I am happy to share with you that despite the pandemic, the University has remained the most productive in research among Philippine private universities.

Producing a large collection of Scopus papers since 2008, we have managed to be the country’s leading higher education institution in research from 2019 to 2022. For our achievements in research, our institution has received the DOST Science for the People (SFTP) Award for Partner Academic Institutions. The rankings use the same research-intensive indicators as THE’s World University Rankings, but are calibrated to reflect the attributes of the region’s higher learning institutions. The universities were assessed in five key areas of teaching (learning environment), research (volume, income, and reputation), citations (research influence), international outlook (staff, students, and research), and industry income (knowledge transfer). For the fourth straight year, DLSU also remains among the world’s leading universities ranked by THE for its success in delivering the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Such achievements are the result of the Lasallian community’s steadfast pursuit of the DLSU vision-mission. I look forward to how this vision-mission, our commitment to quality education, will manifest in your lives. Students at the center of learning At De La Salle University, students like you are at the center of the learning process. This allows you to take advantage of all the opportunities for your holistic development. You may join any of our various student organizations, whether in the field of sports, arts, community engagement, spirituality, or leadership, among many others. You have the support and mentorship of our faculty members, who are products of national and international universities and considered among the most outstanding in their fields. Our extensive network of industry and academic partners will help you explore the latest innovations and developments in your respective fields. Perhaps at some point, deep in your studies or non-academic pursuits, you may also find yourself needing help. Always remember that there are various forms of support to help you in your college journey. The University prioritizes the overall health and well-being of the members of our community, so it will help to know that there is always a hand to hold you. I hope you will also discover more about the life and legacy of our Founder, St. John Baptist de La Salle, who showed us the values of faith in action, zeal for service, and communion in mission. May his spirit inspire and guide you in your journey ahead, towards becoming the future leaders and achievers for God and country. May Jesus live in our hearts, Forever! Animo La Salle! Br. Bernard S. Oca President De La Salle University 10 John Baptist de La Salle is credited as one of the founders of modern classroom-style education. As a priest living in 17th-century France, De La Salle was led by the spirit of God to become involved in the education of youth. Education became his vocation. During his lifetime, he founded a religious order of men, the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools, who devoted themselves to teaching boys and young men. To assist the Brothers in this ministry, he developed the first real strategy for

teaching, created a teacher’s manual, wrote student textbooks, and opened a school to train teachers. He challenged the Brothers of his community to look upon everything with the eyes of faith, to see the person of Christ in their students, and to approach their ministry with great zeal for the evangelization of youth. By the time of his death in 1719, he had established numerous schools throughout France that followed his ideals. This success was later copied in Europe and in America. John Baptist de La Salle was an educational innovator. He looked at the world and saw a need to educate all children, and responded to that calling. In De La Salle’s day, education was reserved for the privileged; generally only those boys and young men whose families could afford private tutors studied at all. Relatively few of these men went on to university. All subjects were taught in Latin, greatly limiting the spread of education and texts. There were no programs to train teachers. The tutors of the day were well-educated men who performed this gentleman’s occupation to earn a living. De La Salle realized that this approach closed education to all but the very wealthy, perpetuating an entrenched upper class while cutting off opportunities for bright but poor children. He believed that the working class and poor had a right to quality education, so he directed his efforts to these youth. What was truly revolutionary was De La Salle’s understanding that a tutorial approach to instruction would never be able to reach the masses—a new technique for instruction was needed. Thus, he developed the simultaneous approach to instruction, using monitors to educate small groups within a larger group. These groups were the first “classrooms,” and this form of instruction remains the principal form of instruction worldwide some 300 years later. De La Salle also understood the critical need for teacher training to ensure success in the classroom, as well as the benefit of teachers continuing their training throughout their careers. Before placing teachers in the classroom, De La Salle trained them and called the teachers aside periodically to renew their instruction. He wrote a training manual for his teachers, The Conduct of Christian Schools, that included extraordinary insight to the task of the classroom instructor. The book outlined rules and techniques for class teaching, including regulations for maintaining discipline, steps for teaching, reading, and even for student assessment and discipline. Our Founder, St. John Baptist de La Salle 11 CONCERN FOR THE POOR AND VULNERABLE John Baptist de La Salle had great love for the poor. He demonstrated this devotion by taking the poor teachers into his home to feed them, by giving away his patrimony, and by requiring the Brothers to teach the poor and working class. He held school on Sundays for those working- class youth who had to labor during the week. De La Salle even opened a school for “incorrigible delinquents.” HIS LEGACY De La Salle and his Brothers succeeded in creating a

network of quality schools throughout France that featured instruction in the vernacular, students grouped according to ability and achievement, integration of religious instruction with secular subjects, well-prepared teachers with a sense of vocation and mission, and the involvement of parents. In 1900, John Baptist de La Salle was declared a saint. In 1950, because of his life and inspirational writings, he was made Patron Saint of Catholic Teachers. His educational legacy has since continued to La Salle schools in over 80 countries. We see that the principles that guided his life remain relevant today. These same principles can be the driving force for all of us involved in the glorious ministry of Catholic education. St. John Baptist de La Salle, Patron of Teachers, pray for us. 12 Preamble De La Salle Philippines is a network of 16 Lasallian schools under the Lasallian East Asia District. It was established to facilitate collaboration in the Lasallian Mission and the promotion of the spirit of faith, zeal for service, and communion in mission. These are at the heart of the journey of our Founder, John Baptist de La Salle. Our schools pursue programs that are geared towards providing quality, transformative Christian education, especially for the most vulnerable children in society. De La Salle Philippines About the DLSP Logo The Star The five-pointed star at the center of the DLSP logo is the Signum Fidei Star. It is a sign of faith and the symbol officially used by the Institute of Brothers of the Christian Schools (Fraternum Scholarum Christianarum or FSC), also known as De La Salle Brothers. It has as its origin the Star of Bethlehem, which led the Magi (Wise Men of the East) to the birthplace of Christ. It represents the faith that has led countless Brothers and members of the Lasallian Family in more than 80 countries to pursue the Lasallian Mission. 13 Broken Chevrons and Indivisa Manent The house of De La Salle was first established in Urgel, an area of Catalonia, Spain, where the form of the family name was “Salla.” The head of the family, Johan Salla, Warrior in Chief of Atphonus the Chaste, King of Oviedo, expelled the Moors from Urgel and reestablished the Episcopal See in 818. The broken legs he sustained during combat as he fought side by side with his king are the origin of the broken chevrons on De La Salle’s coat of arms.* In the 13th century, the La Salle family migrated to the Basque province in the south of France, and though their name became French, they retained “Salla!” as their battle cry. The ancient motto of the family is “Que sien toustem ligato amasse,” which in Gascon dialect means “Let us all be united!” or “Let us all stick together!” The Reims branch of the family translated this motto into the Latin “Indivisa Manent,” which is the present wording of the motto on the coat of arms, literally translated as “Permanently Indivisible.” The Latin phrase is translated into the

present tag line “One La Salle.” The broken chevrons and the motto speak of the courage and commitment that the family of De La Salle wishes to convey in every generation and the importance of remaining undivided at different levels: the personal level, the family/ organizational level, and the network of Lasallian schools in the Philippines and the world. Lasallian Schools in the Philippines De La Salle University (1911) Malate, Manila and Biñan, Laguna La Salle University-Ozamiz (1929) Ozamiz City, Misamis Occidental De La Salle Araneta University (1946) Malabon City, Metro Manila University of St. La Salle (1952) Bacolod City, Negros Occidental La Salle Academy (1958) Iligan City, Lanao del Norte La Salle Green Hills (1959) Mandaluyong City, Metro Manila St. Joseph School-La Salle (1960) Bacolod City, Negros Occidental De La Salle Lipa (1962) Lipa City, Batangas De La Salle John Bosco College (1963) Bislig City, Surigao Del Sur De La Salle Andres Soriano Memorial College (1965) Toledo City, Cebu De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School (1978) Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila La Salle College Antipolo (1985) Antipolo City, Rizal De La Salle University- Dasmariñas (1987) Dasmariñas, Cavite De La Salle Medical Health Sciences Institute (1987) Dasmariñas, Cavite De La Salle - College of Saint Benilde (1988) Malate, Manila St. Jaime Hilario School - De La Salle Bataan (2006) Bagac, Bataan 14 Preamble De La Salle University is an internationally recognized Catholic university in the Philippines established by the Brothers of the Christian Schools in 1911. Inspired by the charism of St. John Baptist de La Salle, the University community, together and by association, provides quality human and Christian education by teaching minds, touching hearts, and transforming lives. Vision-Mission A leading learner-centered and research University bridging faith and scholarship, attuned to a sustainable Earth, and in the service of Church and society, especially the poor and marginalized De La Salle University 15 Core Values Faith DLSU is committed to nurturing a community of distinguished and morally upright scholars that harmonizes faith and life with contemporary knowledge in order to generate and propagate new knowledge for human development and social transformation. Service DLSU is committed to being a resource for Church and nation and to being socially responsible in building a just, peaceful, stable, and progressive Filipino nation. Communion DLSU is committed to building a community of leaders, competent professionals, scholars, researchers, and entrepreneurs, who will participate actively in improving the quality of life in Philippine society within the perspective of Christian ideals and values. 16 Lasallian Values and Lasallian Prayers Spirit of Faith “Let us remember that we are in the most holy presence of God.” Remembering God’s presence is how we tune in to God. It is how we discover His will for us in the present moment. Zeal for Service “I will continue, O my God, to do all my actions for the love of You.” Everything I do becomes a gift to God if it springs from a desire to love Him. God, in turn, takes my gifts and

uses them to bring blessings to the lives of others. 17 Communion in Mission “Live Jesus in our hearts, forever!” If we allow Jesus to live in our hearts, we will realize we can be Jesus for one another. 18 1 General Provisions Section 1: GENERAL DIRECTIVES 1.1 All students1 are required to comply with the provisions of the Student Handbook. They should be familiar with its contents. Ignorance of any provision in the Student Handbook does not excuse any student from being sanctioned for non-compliance. Subject to the duties and responsibilities corresponding to each right as well as the limitations provided for on the Student Handbook, and provided that the exercise of a right does not infringe the right of others, De La Salle University (DLSU or University) recognizes the rights of students under the DLSU Students’ Charter2, more specifically the following: 1.1.1 The right to express concern on matters related to the quality of education they deserve; 1.1.2 The right to be represented in policy-making bodies in the University or in committees handling issues that concern students. Students are represented to the following councils and committees internal to the University. 1.1.2.1 Ad-Hoc Grievance Board 1.1.2.2 Aspiring Organizations Accreditation Committee 1.1.2.3 Canteen Inspection Committee 1.1.2.4 Committee on National Issues and Concerns 1.1.2.5 College Council 1.1.2.6 Council on Inclusion, Diversity, and Well- Being 1 Students refer to all those enrolled in all DLSU courses and programs whether undergraduate, graduate, and School of Law. 2 Refer to Appendix G for the DLSU Students’ Charter 19 1.1.2.7 Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee 1.1.2.8 Drug Testing Selection Board 1.1.2.9 Enrollment Council 1.1.2.10 Housing Committee 1.1.2.11 Multi-Sectoral Consultative Committee on Tuition and Fees 1.1.2.12 Student Discipline Formation Board 1.1.2.13 Student Fees Revision Committee 1.1.2.14 Student Handbook Revision Committee 1.1.2.15 Task Force Safe School Committee 1.1.2.16 University Honors and Awards Council 1.1.2.17 University Library Council 1.1.2.18 University Panel for Case Conference 1.1.2.19 University Vision-Mission Week Executive Committee 1.1.3 The right to organize among themselves; 1.1.3.1 The right to freely associate themselves with organizations, alliances, and federations, given that this right is practiced with due diligence and utmost responsibility in partaking in activities, provided that these do not contradict the University’s vision and mission, the responsibilities of students stated in the Students’ Charter (Appendix G, Chapter 3), the University’s Zero-Tolerance for All Forms of Violence Policy (Appendix J), the Anti-Hazing Act of 2018 (RA 11053, see Appendix V), other relevant University policies, and the state’s governing laws. 1.1.4 The right to express one’s self provided it is exercised in accordance with the University’s social norms; and 20 1.1.5 The right to due process of law; and 1.1.6 The right of students to be free from discrimination on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, race, color, religion, age, physical disability, and mental illness. 1.2 All students should respect Catholic and other religious practices and beliefs in campus, such as praying before and after class. The Angelus, a Catholic devotion recited daily at

12 noon and 6:00 p.m., should also be properly observed by Catholics and respected by non-Catholics. Everyone should cease the performance of activities for a moment of silent reflection during the recitation of the Angelus. 1.3 All students should always give reverence and respect to the Philippine National Flag by participating in the singing of the Philippine National Anthem, as stipulated in Republic Act No. 8491, otherwise known as Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines. 1.4 The University recognizes the hazards of smoking to health and declares the University premises, as defined in Sec. 5.5.2 (University Jurisdiction), a non-smoking area. 1.5 Students should be polite and courteous towards all persons at all times. 1.6 Upon enrollment, students are issued original identification cards (ID) with computer-registered student numbers. Students are required to scan their ID upon entry and visibly wear it while inside the campus or any of its satellite premises where the university has jurisdiction. The ID is valid as long as the student is enrolled at the University. The student must present the ID when asked by the University personnel and authorities, but it cannot be confiscated. Students who lose or misplace their ID may secure a campus pass following the process stated in the implementing guidelines on ID policy.3 1.7 Students are liable for false information on their ID, registration forms, and other school documents. Students who have transferred residence or have changed their civil status should 3 Please refer to Appendix P for the guidelines on the implementation of the ID Policy. 21 inform the Office of the University Registrar through the Request for Change of Information Form (OUR Form no. RE- 10-201508) downloadable from the DLSU website (www.dlsu. edu.ph). Any written communication sent to the last recorded address of students should be considered delivered even if returned. 1.8 Students are responsible for the submission and completion of required documents and forms by the concerned offices. Non- compliance or non-submission of documents and forms would constrain the offices to regulate the students’ IDs or place their clearance or enrollment status on hold. Similarly, International Students are mandated by Philippine Immigration Laws to comply with required visa for study. 1.9 The University regards its students as responsible individuals from the time they are admitted. Consequently, it is the responsibility of students to keep their parents or guardians informed or updated on their academic standing, the status of their attendance and the status of their discipline record, including the consequences of their failures, absences, and discipline infractions. 1.10 Classes are automatically suspended, without need for any announcement from the University, under the following conditions: 1.10.1 All levels (Pre-School to Doctoral) 1.10.1.1 During regular holidays or when declared as a special non-working holiday by the Office of the President of the Philippines or, in the case of local holidays, by the local government of the Province/ City/ Municipality having political jurisdiction over the campus. 1.10.1.2 When specifically declared as “all levels” and for private schools by national government agencies,

such as the Office of the President or the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC); or 1.10.1.3 When specifically declared as “all levels” and for private schools by the local government for classes held in campuses covered by its jurisdiction; or 22 1.10.1.4 When Typhoon Signal No. 3 or above is raised. 1.10.2 College, master’s, and doctoral levels 1.10.2.1 When declared by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for private schools. 1.11 The University President makes the decision for the suspension of classes under the following conditions: 1.11.1 In cases when the decision on the suspension of classes, for whatever reason, is left by the government to the discretion of the school; 1.11.2 In all other cases when the school, on its own, intends to suspend classes. 1.11.3 In cases when an announcement of suspension of classes by the government is made, when classes for the day have already begun, the University President shall, only for purposes of standardizing the cut-off time for the suspension of classes, determine the time of the suspension. 1.12 When left to the University, the decision to suspend classes takes into account many factors, such as safety of the members of the Lasallian community, academic calendar, government regulations on class contact hours, and many others. The University shall exert all efforts to decide on suspension of classes at the earliest practicable time. 1.12.1 As a general rule, unless there is an announcement to the contrary, classes will proceed as usual. 1.13 The decision of the University President will be communicated to the Office of the Provost for dissemination. The official announcement of the suspension of classes will be made through the following official social media accounts: • De La Salle University http://www.facebook.com/DLSU.Manila.100 http://twitter.com/DLSUManila • De La Salle University - Laguna Campus http://www.facebook.com/ DLSUScienceTechnologyComplex 23 1.14 The DLSU campuses open and close on the following times, unless otherwise announced: Manila Campus 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Laguna Campus 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Rufino Taguig (BGC) Campus 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday to Saturday Only those with a Special Permit for Campus Access (SPCA) will be allowed to enter earlier than and stay beyond these hours. 1.15 Campus access status, to be declared by the University President or the Vice President for Administration, may be classified as follows: 1.15.1 Open 1.15.1.1 When this campus access status is in effect, the campus maintains normal operating hours — 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.— and activities. 1.15.2 Restricted 1.15.2.1 When this campus access status is in effect, all scheduled activities for the day within the campus are cancelled and the entry to and the stay on campus is limited to those covered by a valid Special Permit for Campus Access approved and issued AFTER the declaration of the campus access status. Those approved and issued BEFORE the declaration of the campus access status are deemed cancelled. 1.15.2.2 Campus access may be given to individuals if the transit, stay, and the

planned activities do not pose any threat to the safety of the participants, including those who will provide support services. 1.15.2.3 The campus is on restricted campus access status automatically from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. the following day, Mondays to Saturdays, and on Sundays and holidays. 24 1.15.2.4 When office work is suspended before classes for the day being, personnel will still be allowed to enter the campus until 9:30 a.m. to allow them to secure important materials from their offices. However, all personnel must exit by 10:00 a.m. Entry and exit during this period will be logged and strictly monitored. Only personnel authorized to stay inside the campus will be allowed to do so. 1.15.3 Shelter-in-Place 1.15.3.1 This campus access status may be declared only when classes have begun for the day. 1.15.3.2 During suspension of classes and office work, everyone is expected to exit the campus within one (1) hour after the suspension. However, when this campus access status is in effect, those waiting to be fetched or for weather conditions to improve may stay in areas designated by authorities. The following specific areas are automatically designated as such: Manila Campus • The covered walk from Gate 2 (North Gate) to Gate 3 (Velasco) • The waiting areas of Gate 1 (South Gate) • The front entrances of the Br. Andrew Gonzalez Hall • The front entrances of the Gokongwei Hall Laguna Campus • The East Canopy and East entrance of the Milagros Del Rosario Building • The front entrances of LC 1 and LC 2 buildings 25 Rufino Campus • The front entrance of the DLSU Rufino Building 1.15.3.3 During situations when students and personnel are stranded on campus, the University shall designate controlled holding areas for overnight stay and provide necessities. 1.15.3.4 While the status is in effect, loitering inside the campus and/or staying inside the office or work area are strictly prohibited. 1.15.4 Closed (Extremely Restricted) When this campus access status is in effect, the campus shall strictly be off-limits to all members of the Lasallian community. The declaration of this status means that transit, stay, and activities inside the campus present clear threats to safety of the community. Special Permits for Campus Access approved and issued prior to this status taking effect are deemed revoked. Access is given exclusively to individuals who are required to perform tasks critical to the operations or resumption of the operations. 1.15.5 The restrictions on campus access do not apply to the following: 1.15.5.1 University President 1.15.5.2 Provost and the Associate Provost 1.15.5.3 Senior Vice President and Vice Presidents 1.15.5.4 Executive Directors 1.15.5.5 University Fellows 1.15.5.6 Deans and Associate Deans 1.15.5.7 Principal and Associate Principals 1.15.5.8 Executive Director, Community, Culture, and Human Resources Services Office 1.15.5.9 Director, University Safety Office 1.15.5.10 Director, Security Office 26 1.15.5.11 De La Salle Brothers, their special guest(s), and others who reside at the Brothers Community 1.15.5.12 Technical workers from utility companies 1.15.5.13 Contracted workers scheduled to work on campus 1.15.6 The Special

Permit for Campus Access (SPCA) is granted by the Office of the Vice President for Administration, through the Security Office or, in the case of the Laguna Campus, through the Office of the Vice President for Laguna. The SPCA guidelines on processing including the form is available online. 1.16 The provisions on suspension and campus access are detailed in the University Guidelines on Suspension of Classes and Office Work and Restriction in Campus Access. Any change in the approved guidelines will be posted via official channels of communication. 1.17 The University acknowledges the right of the students to equal access to available campus space. Benches and tables in campus meant for students shall be accessible to all who wish to use them on a principle of right by physical presence. It is understood that students will occupy only the space they need. 1.18 The University values the health and well-being of the members of the academic community. 1.18.1 Undergraduate and graduate students are required to undergo the scheduled entrance and annual health examination conducted by the Health Services Office (HSO). 1.18.2 All students who are diagnosed to have communicable diseases and/or those who are unable to report to class because of a prolonged illness are required to seek clearance from the HSO before returning to the University. 1.18.3 All students are required to undergo drug testing as part of the health and wellness of Lasallian students. The guidelines pertaining to the implementation of the drug testing are in accordance with the government mandated laws.4 27 mandated laws.4 1.18.4 The University does not sanction student membership in non-DLSU accredited organizations. 1.19 The University does not allow student membership in non-DLSU accredited organizations within DLSU. Section 2: STUDENT CLASSIFICATION 2.1 Undergraduate students enrolled in the University are classified by year level in the curriculum and according to degree program as follows: Year Level Designation Frosh 1 or Fr Sophomore 2 or So Junior 3 or Jr Senior 4 or Sr Terminal 5 or Tr 2.2 Graduate students admitted to the University are classified as follows: 2.2.1 Regular: When the student has met all the admission requirements of the program; 2.2.2 Probationary: When the student needs to fulfill certain requirements or pre-requisites of the program. 2.2.3 Conditional: When the student lacks certain documents, as indicated on the Notice of Graduate Studies Admission. Non-fulfillment of the conditions within thirty (30) 4 See Appendix Y for the Guidelines in the implementation of LFAD Drug Testing Program, including relevant government laws on drug testing (DDB Board Regulation No. 3 Series of 2009 and CHED Memorandum Order (CMO) No. 64, Series of 2017). 28 working days from admission shall result in the automatic cancellation of enrollment without any refund. 2.3 Colleges/Schools and Departments Br. Andrew Gonzalez FSC College of Education The Br. Andrew Gonzalez FSC College of Education (BAGCED) envisions itself as a center of excellence in the development of educational leaders, researchers, counselors, and professionals in the Asia-Pacific region. BAGCED implements training and development programs responsive

to educational and professional needs, and contributes research for policy formulation, knowledge expansion, and attitude and value formation. • Counseling and Educational Psychology • Educational Leadership and Management • English and Applied Linguistics • Physical Education • Science Education College of Computer Studies (CCS) The College of Computer Studies (CCS) is committed to its three-pronged vision of continually sharing knowledge and expertise through teaching, engaging in Computing research and product development, and rendering services to communities in need. CCS upholds the tradition of excellence through its programs that emphasize the application of theories and the development of human-centric projects. Students are trained to be experts in their chosen field and become tomorrow’s leaders in industry, academe, and government. • Computer Technology • Information Technology • Software Technology College of Liberal Arts (CLA) The College of Liberal Arts aims to be a leading center of higher learning in the arts, humanities, and social sciences in the 29 Asia-Pacific. It provides a holistic Lasallian education to learners by nurturing their creativity, critical thinking, interpersonal and lifelong learning skills. The faculty and students are committed to produce excellent research and creative works in their respective academic fields and to pursue at the same time meaningful collaborative projects that are responsive to the needs of society in a fast-changing world. Through the years, CLA has been home to distinguished social scientists, great writers and artists, renowned filmmakers, world-class performers, public intellectuals and exemplary student leaders. • Communication • Filipino • History • International Studies • Literature • Philosophy • Political Science and Development Studies • Psychology • Sociology and Behavioral Science • Theology and Religious Education College of Science (COS) The thrust of the College of Science is to nurture and sustain an academic community that is intellectually, socially, and spiritually responsive to the needs of our nation and its people, using the vision and capabilities of science. Through the College’s various programs and services, we strive to imbue ourselves with the values manifested in the different scientific disciplines. The College of Science adheres to the principle of providing curricular offerings of the highest quality, with a particular emphasis on research and development. • Biology • Chemistry • Mathematics and Statistics • Physics 30 Gokongwei College of Engineering (GCOE) The Gokongwei College of Engineering (GCOE) is a model institution of research, as it supports research projects that respond to the needs of both industrialized and the rural regions in the country. It has earned recognition from reputable organizations for research conducted by faculty and students which have significantly contributed to national development. The Gokongwei College of Engineering is known for its relevant and progressive curriculum; a faculty roster of top caliber academics and industry practitioners; and modern laboratories and state-of-the-art equipment in the formation of highly competent, morally-grounded, and service-oriented engineering professionals. • Chemical Engineering • Civil Engineering • Electronics and Communications Engineering • Industrial Engineering • Manufacturing Engineering and Management • Mechanical Engineering Ramon V. Del Rosario College of Business (RVRCOB) The Ramon

V. del Rosario College of Business (RVR COB) is committed to the continuous pursuit of excellence in business education responsive to the needs for humanistic and ethical management skills needed to balance economic and sustainability goals of future leaders, managers and entrepreneurs. • Accountancy • Commercial Law • Decision Sciences & Innovation • Financial Management • Marketing and Advertising • Management and Organization 31 School of Innovation and Sustainability (SIS) The School of Innovation and Sustainability is a college at the Laguna campus dedicated to cultivating a dynamic learning environment that integrates interdisciplinary practices across various disciplines. The school aims to empower students with the knowledge, skills, and mindset needed to address contemporary challenges and contribute to a more sustainable and innovative future. Faculty members are experts in their respective fields, fostering a collaborative and forward-thinking academic community. The School of Innovation and Sustainability engages in research initiatives, industry partnerships, and community outreach to promote real-world applications of innovative and sustainable solutions. By providing a holistic education that blends creativity, critical thinking, and a commitment to environmental and social responsibility, the school aims to produce Lasallian graduates who are well-prepared to contribute positively to the global challenges of the 21st century. School of Economics (SOE) The DLSU School of Economics (SOE) represents more than 50 years of leadership in economics education, research, and public service. It has stood for innovative and committed teaching, rigorous research, and steadfast engagement with the public and private sector. It pioneered many practices now considered standard within the profession: the emphasis on mathematical and econometric training for undergraduates, early exposure to evidence-based research and the publication of new knowledge, the development of a scientific discourse in Filipino, problem-based learning, service learning, and investment in new economic methodologies. Every year, its majors reap a disproportionate number of academic and non- academic awards from university and national-award giving bodies, a final statement to the culture of excellence and Lasallian mentoring that animates DLSU Economics. • Economics School of Lifelong Learning (SoLL) The School of Lifelong Learning (SoLL) is the continuing education provider and consulting arm of De La Salle University. SoLL offers specialized certificate courses in partnership with industry associations, customized short-term programs for 32 client institutions, public seminars, and consultancy services. It also acts as the institutional and development unit of DLSU. SoLL harnesses the expertise of the faculty of the entire University, which is composed not only of academicians but also of various professionals with experience in different industries and organizations in both the public and private sectors. Tañada-Diokno School of Law (TDSOL) The De La Salle University Tañada-Diokno School of Law is envisioned as a leading legal education institution that molds future leaders in the legal profession. Established to serve as the University’s gift to the nation in celebration of its centenary, the School gives special focus on human rights in its program and reflects the vision and advocacy of Filipino nationalists, patriots and Lasallian lawyers, Lorenzo Tañada and Jose Diokno. The School imparts

knowledge and provides support to prepare students to pass the bar examination, hones their skills to prepare them for law practice, and gives students an opportunity to participate in formation activities. 2.4 Administrators in the Colleges, Schools, and Departments5 2.4.1 Dean As the Chief Executive Officer of the college/school, the Academic Dean provides overall leadership and general supervision. 2.4.2 Associate Dean The Associate Dean handles all student-related matters (students’ concerns, academic advising, students’ programs, students’ professional organizations, student complaints and grievances, etc.) in the college or school and performs other administrative functions that are assigned by the Dean. 2.4.3 Assistant Deans 2.4.3.1 External Affairs and Lasallian Mission 5 As provided in the Administration Manual of 2016 33 The Assistant Dean for External Affairs and Lasallian Mission assists the Dean in fostering mutually beneficial relationships between the college or school and its external stakeholders. The Assistant Dean helps ensure the successful and effective implementation of college/school programs for visiting scholars, service and experiential learning, community engagement, and quality assurance and accreditation. 2.4.3.2 Research and Advanced Studies The Assistant Dean for Research and Advanced Studies in each college or school is focused on promoting and monitoring the synergy between research, conducted in the academic departments and the affiliated centers, laboratories and institutes, and academic activities both at the undergraduate and graduate levels. 2.4.4 Department Chair The Chair works in close collaboration with the Dean in matters pertaining to the strategic direction, management, and coordination of the academic programs, research, and community engagement activities in line with the College and department’s vision-mission. 2.4.5 Department Vice-Chair The Vice Chair assists the Department Chair in matters pertaining to course loading and offerings as well as student concerns, welfare, and activities under the department. 2.4.6 Graduate Program Coordinator 2.5 Undergraduate Students who would like to shift to another program within the same or a different college may apply for shifting only after two (2) completed terms in the current program. Graduate Students who would like to shift to another program within the same or a different college may apply for shifting only after one (1) completed term in the current program. 34 The schedule and procedures for shifting are available through the announcements and postings of the Office of the University Registrar. For students taking a double degree program, dropping one degree with the intent of pursuing a single degree program shall be regarded as shifting and should follow the schedule and procedures for shifting. 2.5.1 Shifting can be done only up to two times for both undergraduate and graduate students. 2.5.2 When a student shifts to another program, failures in courses that are not part of the curriculum of the new program shall not be included in the computation of accumulated units of failures. These failures shall, however, still be reflected in the transcript of records, and included in the computation of the CGPA. 35 Section 3: COMMUNICATION 3.1 All official business with any office, unit or department of the University, or with any administrative

personnel, should be transacted in writing following the standard letter format. The student should provide two (2) copies: one copy for the office concerned and the other one noted by the recipient for the student as a receiving copy. Oral arrangements or agreements should be supported afterwards by a written document. Emails are considered official communication. 3.2 All letters, requests and the like should be deposited to the Mailing Unit for routing or sent directly to the person addressed. The Mailing Unit is found at the South Wing of St. La Salle Hall. Communications from students should be preferably encoded. 3.3 All communications should be signed and should indicate the student’s name and ID number. For email communications, students are strongly encouraged to use their official DLSU account. 3.4 Under special circumstances, academic-related and discipline- related information regarding students enrolled at the University may only be obtained from the Office of the University Registrar (OUR) and the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO), respectively. 3.5 Any person who transacts business with the OUR, the Finance and Accounting Office (FAO), SDFO, and the Dean’s Office, for and on behalf of a student, should present a letter of authorization. The office concerned may require notarization of such documents. 3.6 Given the hybrid setting, students may communicate with the University’s administrative offices through the trunkline (632) 8524-4611 and (632) 8465-8900 or through their email and mobile numbers found in Appendix E. 36 Section 4: SOCIAL NORMS All members of the University community are expected to observe politeness, etiquette, and courtesy in dealing with the other members and guests on campus at all times. They are expected to show respect to all persons and for differences in abilities, religion, race, sexual orientation and gender identity, and political beliefs. Upon admission to the University, a student is regarded as a mature individual with all the rights and responsibilities of a citizen to foster an environment that is conducive for academic, social, and moral development. All these contribute to the goal of achieving a Lasallian education and upholding Lasallian values for the common good within and outside the University. With this, certain forms of conduct and demeanor should be observed as follows: 4.1 The University acknowledges that everyone has the right to dress comfortably, to be responsible for their own behavior, and to be able to effectively focus on the learning process amidst possible distractions. The minimum required University attire is aimed at keeping the learning space safe during specific class activities, allowing students to be comfortable and to express their gender identity, religious affiliation, and advocacy, without fear of discipline or discrimination. All students must observe the University Attire Policy presented in Appendix K. 4.2 Students should follow the standard classroom policies and procedures. 4.2.1 Prescribed attire may be required by faculty members in their classes or during specific activities or events. 4.2.2 Appropriate and proper use of electronic devices as defined by faculty to support instruction (e.g., cellular phones and other communication devices, laptops, etc.)

should be observed to promote a classroom environment that is conducive for learning. 4.2.3 Use of instructional equipment and materials in classrooms for academic and related purposes should follow the guidelines on venue and equipment reservation.9 4.2.4 Proper care and responsible use of all classroom equipment, furniture, and other gadgets of the University should be exercised at all times. 9 https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/offices/registrar/policies/online-classroom-reservation-system/ 37 4.3 Faculty members are also allowed to set additional policies and procedures provided that these are reasonable, do not infringe on any other existing University rules and policies, and are mutually agreed upon by the faculty and students. Any student who violates these policies and procedures may be asked to report immediately to the SDFO for investigation. The student must obtain a Re-admission Slip, without which the respondent may neither be re-admitted to class, allowed to take the examination, nor enroll. The student shall be marked “absent” for every session missed from the date they are sent out until the time of readmission. The SDFO shall inform the complainant of actions taken on the case. 4.4 Students should observe proper decorum and attire during academic and non-academic events held online, on campus and off-campus. Specific guidelines on proper decorum in auditoriums should also be followed7. 4.5 Noisy, disrespectful, or disruptive behaviors that are deliberate and distract ongoing classes and activities will not be permitted. In addition, everyone is expected to remain where they are during the recitation of the Angelus, regardless of their religious affiliation. 4.6 Students are encouraged to observe elevator courtesy. 4.7 Specific rules and markings are posted in classrooms, university libraries, canteens, restrooms, and in other facilities under the University’s jurisdiction and should be strictly observed. Further, the areas identified as restricted and are identified for specific groups (such as restrooms and faculty areas) must be respected and followed. 4.8 The University encourages healthy interaction among students. Students are enjoined to be mindful of others in their surroundings when on campus. They are encouraged to practice utmost self-discipline in order to keep their focus on their learning. Acts or gestures that tend to cause distraction from learning in the classroom or anywhere on campus will be referred to the SDFO for dialogue and formation. Students are reminded to refrain from acts of lewdness that are prohibited in Section 5.3.1.11. In line with this, they should comply with the implementing guidelines set by the University Student Government (USG), Graduate Student Council (GSC), and the SDFO. 7 See Appendix P: Implementing Guidelines for Discipline-Related Policies. 38 4.9 The University encourages students to use campus facilities for social, cultural, and recreational activities; and business meetings. However, the University reserves the right to deny the use of such facilities to those who do not abide by the University regulations. 4.10 Students who invite guests from outside the campus (e.g., lecturers, speakers, and seminar participants) are requested to submit a Special Permit for Campus Access (SPCA) from the Security Office, indicating the names of the campus visitors, the purpose of

their visit, and the expected time of their arrival. 4.11 The University recognizes the importance of support for students’ wellness. Any student deemed to be dealing with mental health issues may be assisted by the Office of Counseling and Career Services (OCCS). The Associate Dean of the student concerned shall convene a committee, whose members include the Director of OCCS, the Director of the Health Services Office (HSO), and the Director of the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well-being (LCIDWell). The Committee should consult a mental health professional (either a psychiatrist or a licensed clinical psychologist) to assess the student and make recommendations on how to help the student and facilitate clinically appropriate transitions or sharing of care. The mental health professional will advise whether it is safe and beneficial for the student to continue studying. The Committee will ensure that the recommended intervention is applied. A leave of absence due to mental health reasons may be extended depending on the recommendation of the mental health professional. (See Section 13.6) 4.12 Participation of students in any external academic or non-academic activity (e.g., contest, play, band, orchestra, choir, conference, association, society, or group) as official representatives of the University or any of its recognized student organizations or groups, should be approved by the College Associate Dean (for academic activities) or the Dean of Student Affairs (for non-academic activities). An office may endorse approval of other external participation of students. 4.13 Students may release notices of University or student activities to the press, or similar channels of public communication, only after securing clearance from the Office for Strategic 39 Communications (STRATCOM) through the Dean of Student Affairs (DSA). 4.14 Activities that inflict physical or psychological harm or demean the dignity of an individual (e.g., hazing, initiation, etc.) are not allowed. The University is, however, not responsible for the actions of students who on their own, without regard of the existing law, and despite awareness of possible grave punitive sanctions, will engage in such activities, either actively or passively. 4.15 Policy Statement on Academic Honesty As a Catholic University that prepares its students to become professionals and be the resource for Church and nation, De La Salle University puts premium on academic honesty. Students’ academic requirements, such as assignments, term papers, computer programs, projects, and thesis papers, should be their own work. They must distinguish between their own ideas and those of other authors. Students must cite references, direct quotes, and other sources (including data obtained from tables, illustrations, figures, pictures, images, and video) following the prescribed format of the discipline. If students plan to submit a similar previous work for credit in different courses, written permission must first be obtained from the faculty members concerned. In addition, for works where they are only one of the authors, the following must be observed: 4.15.1 A disclaimer stating that the work is not entirely theirs should be provided; 4.15.2 The work cannot be published without the written consent of the group of authors;

4.15.3 If the work is separable (i.e., parts are clearly attributed to the individual authors), the students may use and must cite their own part only; otherwise, the students must seek the written consent of the group of authors. 4.15.4 Computer codes obtained from open source reference may be copied subject to the license agreement, 40 but the source should be cited, provided further that the faculty member allows the use of open source reference in the course. 4.16 The University recognizes the value of genuine concern for the environment. Students are encouraged to observe practices that put this value into action. 4.17 Faculty members, administrators, or staff members, as second parents, may call the attention of students whose behavior and actions do not uphold the provisions of this Student Handbook. Section 5: LASALLIAN COMMUNITY STANDARDS The character formation and the practice of Lasallian values are the ultimate objectives of having rules and responsibilities, proper decorum and social norms, in and outside the University. These define the Lasallian community standards that play a significant role in providing Lasallian students a holistic educational experience. In line with this, the students are also expected to exercise their rights as they fulfill their obligations and responsibilities in and outside the campus. This is a response to their duty not only as students but also as citizens. To fulfill these goals, Lasallian students need to know University discipline policies, rules and procedures. This section intends to meet this need. 5.1 Role of the Student Discipline Formation Office 5.1.1 The Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) promotes and supervises student discipline formation by implementing the provisions on this Student Handbook, primarily within University premises as defined on this section and also during University- supervised activities held outside its premises. It focuses on corrective measures for student misbehavior and preventive discipline approaches including discipline orientation and learning sessions and formative interventions. 5.1.2 The specific functions of the SDFO are to: • Promote student discipline formation, ensure and maintain proper student decorum, and instill the value of responsibility and vigilance to students; 41 • Protect the students and promote peace and order in the campus through discipline education; • Enforce the pertinent provisions of the Student Handbook; • Manage the lost and found items of the Lasallian community; • Support and perform the administrative functions of the Student Discipline Formation Board (SDFB), the University Panel for Case Conference (UPCC), and the Office of the University Legal Counsel (OULC); • Provide student discipline clearances; and • Coordinate with other offices and units of the University on student discipline and decorum. 5.1.3 There are three (3) sections under SDFO: 5.1.3.1 Discipline Enforcement Section (DES) - this section enforces the pertinent provisions of Sections 1, 4, and 5 of the Student Handbook on General Directives, Social Norms, and Lasallian Community Standards. 5.1.3.2 Discipline Education, Advocacy & Programs Section (DEAPS) – this section carries out the SDFO’s policy education, student advocacies and formation programs. 5.1.3.3 Lost and Found and Clearance Section (LFCS)

– this section ensures the proper implementation of University policies, rules, and regulations related to lost and found items on campus, issuance of student clearances, monitoring of the use of lockers in the campus, and renders administrative support to SDFB and UPCC for case hearing. 5.2 Jurisdiction over Discipline-Related Cases 5.2.1 The Director of SDFO shall have jurisdiction over all minor offenses involving students under these rules. 42 The respondent is required to see the Director of SDFO who investigates and decides on the case. 5.2.2 The University Panel for Case Conference (UPCC) shall have jurisdiction over all major offenses involving students should there be complete admission on the part of the respondent. The UPCC is composed of the Director of SDFO or an appointed representative as the presiding officer, the Dean of Student Affairs (DSA) or the Associate Dean of Student Affairs as the DSA’s alternate, a student representative trained and appointed by the USG and SDFO, and the Associate Dean of the College where the student belongs. The UPCC meets the student and their parent/s or guardian to hear and decide on the discipline offense committed by the student. 5.2.2.1 Proceedings in the case conference are governed by rules applicable to Summary Proceedings before the Student Discipline Formation Board (SDFB). 5.2.3 The Student Discipline Formation Board (SDFB) shall have jurisdiction over all major offenses involving students should there be incomplete or qualified admission, or full denial on the part of the respondent, pursuant to the published rules of the SDFO. 5.2.3.1 The SDFB is composed of a Chair who is a member of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP) and not a member of the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO), and three other members representing sectors of administration, faculty, and students. The sector representatives may appoint alternates. The administration and student representatives shall not come from the SDFO and the USG, respectively. The Associate University Legal Counsel (AULC), who is a member of the IBP and appointed by the President from the University constituency, assists the University and the parties in conducting formal hearings. 43 5.2.3.2 Formal Hearing before the Board Procedures for the filing of complaint, investigation, and case endorsement in this section will be standard also for the management of all complaints and cases. The following procedures, which may be conducted face-to-face or online, will be followed in handling complaints against students. Refer to Appendix P for a flowchart of this procedure. 5.2.3.2.1 Complaint 5.2.3.2.1.1 For major discipline offenses, a formal complaint in writing whether under oath or not is filed with the SDFO by any person having direct knowledge of the commission of the act complained within 100 calendar days upon the date of its discovery. For minor offenses, 30 calendar days is given to the complainant to file a written complaint with the SDFO from the date of its discovery. 5.2.3.2.1.2 The SDFO will ask the respondent to fill out the Incident Report and Student Response Form. 5.2.3.2.1.3 If the respondent will not

indicate the presence of a mental health condition, the case will be handled with the usual process (see Section 5.2.3.2.2 and onwards) and will 44 be endorsed to the OULC to determine if the case should proceed or be dismissed. If in the process, a mental health concern arises, SDFO may refer the respondent to the OCCS for psychological support and/or the LCIDWell for assessment and intervention. 5.2.3.2.1.4 If the respondent reports a mental health condition as stated in the Student Response Form, the respondent will be asked to submit a psychological report from a licensed clinical psychologist. If the respondent has not been assessed, he/she will be required to undergo a psychological assessment with the following options: 5.2.3.2.1.4.1 Option 1: The LCIDWell clinical psychologist will conduct the psychological assessment. 5.2.3.2.1.4.2 Option 2: The respondent will be asked to undergo a psychological assessment from a licensed psychologist external to DLSU and the report will be submitted to SDFO and will be reviewed by the LCIDWell clinical psychologist. 5.2.3.2.1.5 If the respondent is undergoing psychological assessment and/or intervention, the complainant will be informed. 5.2.3.2.1.6 The LCIDWell clinical psychologist may provide 45 recommendations for: • Further assessment • Possible interventions • Handling case investigation and deliberations by the UPCC/ SDFB • Other mental health support 5.2.3.2.1.7 If recommended for further psychological assessment and/or intervention, the respondent will be asked to submit a certification from the attending clinical psychologist or psychiatrist to SDFO. 5.2.3.2.1.8 The case will be endorsed to the OULC to determine if the case should proceed or be dismissed. 5.2.3.2.1.9 The LCIDWell clinical psychologist can be invited as a resource person during the hearings as a consultant on mental health issues in the case deliberations. Refer to Appendix P for a flowchart that illustrates the above procedures. 5.2.3.2.2 Answer 5.2.3.2.2.1 The SDFO shall conduct an initial investigation of the complaint by requiring the respondent to answer within five (5) working days from receipt of the complaint. The respondent may opt to remain silent during the initial investigation. 46 5.2.3.2.3 Clarificatory Hearing to Determine Prima Facie Case / Mediation The University Legal Counsel (ULC) may summon both parties for clarificatory questions in determining whether there is a prima facie case. If the ULC finds no prima facie case, they would dismiss the complaint. The decision of the ULC in finding whether or not there is a prima facie case is final and not appealable. If the ULC finds a prima facie case, the complaint will be given clearance to proceed. If the case falls under the list of mediatable offenses, the case may be referred to mediation upon agreement of the parties under Section 5.2.3.4. The decision of the ULC on whether there is a prima facie case is final and not appealable. 5.2.3.2.4 Endorsement to SDFB/UPCC After the ULC resolution, the SDFO shall endorse the case and all pertinent documents to the SDFB/UPCC for case conference. 5.2.3.2.5 Notice of Hearing After completion of the required documents, the case is filed

before the SDFB and a notice of hearing will be issued to all parties involved. The issuance of the notice of initial hearing is mandatory. The 47 notice of hearing should be sent at least five working (5) days before the date of the hearing except when a new schedule has been agreed upon during the hearing. 5.2.3.2.6 Hearing In all cases where the complaint is found to be sufficient in form and substance, the Chair convenes the SDFB to a formal hearing. A majority of the SDFB constitutes a quorum but the student representative should always be present. 5.2.3.2.6.1 The clarificatory hearing before the SDFB shall be summary in nature and shall be conducted using the case conference type of proceedings. However, the SDFB should ensure that the following standards required by due process in discipline cases are satisfied: 5.2.3.2.6.1.1 The respondent should have been informed in writing of the nature and cause of the accusation; 5.2.3.2.6.1.2 The respondent should have been granted the right to answer the charges against them; 5.2.3.2.6.1.3 The respondent should be informed of the evidence against them; 48 5.2.3.2.6.1.4 The respondent is given the right to adduce evidence on their own behalf; and 5.2.3.2.6.1.5 The evidence should be considered by the SDFB. 5.2.3.2.6.2 Should the complaining witness fail to appear without just cause on the scheduled initial hearing despite notice, the complaint is dismissed. On the other hand, should the respondent fail to appear for the initial hearing after notice and without sufficient cause, this fact is placed on record and the hearing shall proceed ex-parte without prejudice to the appearance of respondent in subsequent hearings. 5.2.3.2.6.3 Evidence, testimonial or documentary, is limited to allegations in the complaint or answer; 5.2.3.2.6.4 Witnesses testify under oath. Testimonial Affidavit may be submitted. 5.2.3.2.6.5 The Chair exercises complete control of the proceedings on all stages. The Chair prescribes the order in the presentation of evidence by the parties. The Chair rules on the exclusion of other witnesses for the same party while a witness testifies. The Chair has the power to rule 49 on the admissibility of evidence or testimony. The Chair may invite a University Counselor as consultant or resource person during the formal hearings and/ or summary proceedings. The student-respondent may be represented by a private counsel of choice during formal hearings. However, the private counsel must direct all clarificatory questions through the SDFB Chair, who can screen the questions to be asked. 5.2.3.2.6.6 As a general rule, clarificatory hearings are continuous the moment they begin. All cases should be finished the soonest possible time, but each party is allowed only one postponement upon submission of a written request addressed to the SDFB at least three (3) working days before the date of formal hearings or summary proceedings or to the UPCC for case conferences copy furnished all concerned. 5.2.3.2.6.7 A record of the entire proceeding is taken and filed as part of the record of the case. The parties may be furnished copies of

the record (Transcript of the Stenographic Notes) of the proceedings upon request and upon payment of the required fee. 50 5.2.3.2.7 Decision 5.2.3.2.7.1 The duty of the SDFB is to find and establish facts relevant and substantial evidence on which to base a decision rendered in the manner provided. 5.2.3.2.7.2 A majority of the SDFB, which consists of a quorum, is necessary to pass a judgment in a case. However, if the penalty imposed is expulsion or dismissal, a unanimous vote of the members present consisting a quorum is necessary. Failure to obtain a unanimous vote automatically calls for the imposition of the next lower penalty. In case of a tie on whether the respondent is guilty or not, the student respondent shall be exonerated, or the case shall be dismissed. It is the duty of members of the SDFB present and constituting a quorum to cast their votes. There shall be no abstentions. 5.2.3.2.7.3 The SDFB renders its decision within five (5) working days from the date the case is submitted for decision. The decision shall be in writing stating the reasons therefore, copy furnished the Provost, the Associate Dean of the college to which the respondent belongs, the Dean of Student Affairs, the Director of OCCS, the SDFB members, the ULC, the aggrieved party and witnesses, as well as the 51 respondent and their parent or guardian. A copy of the decision with the complaint is filed with the SDFO and forms part of the respondent’s record. 5.2.3.2.7.4 A party not satisfied with the decision of the SDFB may appeal the decision in writing to the Provost within five (5) working days from receipt of the decision, specifically stating the grounds for the appeal (e.g., lack of due process, penalty is too severe, the decision is not based on the evidence presented, etc.). If an appeal is not availed of by a party within the period prescribed, or is turned down, the decision of the SDFB becomes final and immediately executory. The SDFB may defer the imposition of penalty for meritorious reasons. 5.2.3.3 Summary Proceedings If during the clarificatory hearing by the SDFB, the respondent appears and admits guilt in writing, the case may be acted upon by the SDFB summarily. This is entered into the record and the Chair of the SDFB may decide that a hearing be dispensed with. The action is terminated as soon as the respondent explains the charges and the members of the SDFB are through with their clarificatory questions. Any penalty imposed in a summary proceeding is final and immediately executory unless the Board defers the imposition of the penalty for meritorious reasons. 5.2.3.4 Mediation For offenses that can be the subject of mediation as defined in this rule, the parties may undergo mediation and enter into a 52 compromise agreement to settle the case. The following are the specific rules on the mediation process: 5.2.3.4.1 Any compromise agreement or settlement shall be done prior to the termination of the reception of

evidence for the complainant/s. 5.2.3.4.2 Any settlement reached after the termination of the reception of the evidence for the complainant/s shall be valid only upon the approval of the Office of the University Legal Counsel (OULC). The effect of the compromise agreement or settlement shall be the withdrawal and termination of the case. 5.2.3.4.3 In all cases where the case is already filed with the Student Discipline Formation Board (SDFB), the compromise agreement or withdrawal shall be with the approval of the SDFB. 5.2.3.4.4 If the compromise agreement was executed prior to the submission of the records to the OULC, the compromise agreement shall be noted and become part of the Investigation Report to be endorsed to the Office of the University Legal Counsel for review, recommendation, and approval. 5.2.3.4.5 Before the submission of the case to the OULC and up to the filing of the case with the SDFB, the parties may make a written request to the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) for the 53 appointment of a mediator or panel of mediators to facilitate the mediation process. 5.2.3.4.6 In cases where the compromise agreement was executed when it is with the OULC for determination of whether there is a prima facie case and prior to filing of the case with the SDFB, the compromise agreement and eventual termination of the case shall be valid only upon the approval of the OULC. The settlement of the case among the parties shall be considered by the OULC in its determination of whether there is a prima facie case but shall not bar the OULC from filing the case with the SDFB. 5.2.3.4.7 Upon agreement of the parties to settle the case, the parties shall execute a compromise agreement manifesting their agreement to settle the case and setting forth the reasons for the settlement. 5.2.3.4.8 The procedures below will serve as guide for mediation process for cases already filed with the SDFB: 5.2.3.4.8.1 SDFB shall make a determination if the case is a mediatable one. If in the affirmative, the Chair will ask the parties if they are willing to undergo mediation. 5.2.3.4.8.2 If any of the parties disagree, the summary proceedings or formal hearing shall proceed as scheduled. 54 On the other hand, if there is agreement, the Board will appoint a mediator or panel of mediators from the pool of trained mediators. 5.2.3.4.8.3 The mediator or panel of mediators shall submit a report to the SDFB of the result of the mediation process. The SDFB shall review the mediation report and the compromise agreement and shall approve the same unless it is contrary to law, public order, or public policy. 5.2.3.4.8.4 The matters discussed in the mediation process are strictly confidential and are inadmissible as evidence in the case. 5.2.3.4.9 While mediation is encouraged, there are offenses which are, by its nature, non-mediatable. These involve offenses which violate basic principles of honesty and integrity and are not personal in nature. All cases are subject to mediation EXCEPT for

the following offenses which are considered non-mediatable offenses: • any form of cheating or academic dishonesty • cases involving use of firecrackers, deadly weapon, drugs, alcohol, and other vices • deliberate disruption of academic function • acts of lewdness or any acts of immorality 55 • unauthorized collection of money • forgery and/or tampering with official or academic records or any form of fraud • scalping • bribery • computer security breach • willful failure to comply with discipline related summonses • any violation of the Data Privacy Act • cybercrime • violation of policies on the legal review of contracts • violation of any provisions stated in the Zero Tolerance for all Forms of Violence Policy. • other analogous cases where it involves moral turpitude. 5.2.4 Special Powers The Deans are granted a special power to suspend students involved in fraternity rumbles, tumultuous affrays, boycotts, or illegal demonstration for a maximum period of fifteen (15) working days effective upon its imposition. Any decision of the Dean under this section may be appealed to the Provost within five (5) working days from the date the decision is handed. The appeal does not, however, stay the suspension imposed. Any action taken by the Dean, under this section, does not prevent other disciplinary actions that may be imposed arising from the same act or acts. 56 5.2.4.1 The faculty members have the right to demand the presentation of a students’ ID, to give a grade of 0.0, and to deny admission to class of any student caught cheating under Sec. 5.3.1.1. Students should immediately be informed of their grades and barred from further attending their classes. 5.2.4.2 Discipline Formation Officers have the right to demand for the presentation of the students’ ID and summon students who violate any University policy to SDFO for investigation. 5.2.5 Summary Powers 5.2.5.1 For the College Dean or the College Associate Dean The College Dean, or the College Associate Dean, in the absence of the former, may proceed summarily against any student in the following cases: 5.2.5.1.1 Violation of rules and regulations issued by the College. 5.2.5.1.2 Misconduct committed in the presence of a faculty member or any official of the University within the jurisdiction of the College, or in the course of a university function sponsored by the College. 5.2.5.2 For the Dean of Student Affairs The Dean of Student Affairs may proceed summarily against any student in the following cases: 5.2.5.2.1 Misconduct under Sec. 5.2.5.1.2 when committed within the 57 University premises but outside the jurisdiction of any college, school, or academic unit or in the course of a university function. 5.2.5.2.2 Misconduct under Sec. 5.3.1.4, whether or not the acts are committed within the premises, and by individuals belonging to one or several colleges, schools, or academic units. 5.2.5.2.3 Misconduct under Sec. 5.3.1.5, and Sec. 5.3.1.6. 5.2.5.3 Procedures 5.2.5.3.1 The student is summoned to appear before the Dean, informed of the charge against them and afforded the opportunity to present their side. 5.2.5.3.2 Should

the student refuse without cause to appear before the Dean despite being summoned, the refusal is taken into account in imposing the penalty corresponding to the offense committed. 5.2.5.3.3 Any decision taken under this section should be in writing, stating the grounds for which disciplinary action is taken. The decision is final and executory upon the issuance of the order. 5.2.5.3.4 The penalty imposed under this section is suspension not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days. 5.2.5.3.5 Any decision of the Dean under this section may be appealed to the Provost within five (5) working days upon receipt of the 58 decision. The appeal does not, however, stay the suspension imposed. Any action taken by the Dean under this section does not prevent other disciplinary actions that may be imposed arising from the same act or acts. 5.2.6 The rules governing the handling of discipline cases involving students from DLSU, DLS-CSB, and DLS-MHSI are as follows: 5.2.6.1 Ordinarily, cases under this section are handled by the Student Discipline Formation Board of the school where the respondent belongs. However, the case shall be initiated by the said discipline office where the offense was committed, following the procedures in handling discipline cases and complaints in their school. This is without prejudice to the right of the complainant to file the case in any forum other than with the Board. All three schools should extend cooperative efforts in the service of the required documents or pleadings, in the safeguarding of evidence, and in other measures related to the case. 5.2.6.2 In cases arising from the same incident falling under this section, the Student Discipline Formation Office, or similar office, of the respective schools consolidate the cases and file with a joint expanded Board to be constituted for this purpose. The joint expanded Board is composed of the Chairs of the Discipline Boards, administration, faculty, and student representatives of the two schools. The Chair of the Discipline Board of the school with a bigger number of respondents shall act as Chair and the other as Co-Chair. 59 5.2.6.3 Where the number of respondents from both schools are the same in number, the joint expanded Board is presided by the Chair of the Board of the school where the offense is committed. 5.2.6.4 The procedures governing the hearing of the case are those of the school where the Chair of the joint expanded Board comes from. 5.3 Types of Offenses 5.3.1 Major Offenses 5.3.1.1 Cheating in any form during an examination, test, or written reports including reaction papers, case analysis, experiments or assignments required. The act of cheating includes, but is not limited to, the following: 5.3.1.1.1 Unauthorized possession of notes or any material relative to the examination or test whether the student uses them or not. 5.3.1.1.2 Copying or allowing another to copy from one’s examination papers. In the latter case, both parties are liable. 5.3.1.1.3 Looking at another student’s examination paper or allowing another student to look at their examination paper. 5.3.1.1.4 Communicating with

another student or any person in any form during an examination or test without permission from the teacher or proctor. This includes leaking examination questions to another or other student/s. 5.3.1.1.5 Having somebody else take an examination or test for one’s self or prepare a required report or assignment. If both parties are 60 students, both are liable. 5.3.1.1.6 Plagiarism; and 5.3.1.1.7 Other forms of academic dishonesty as duly approved by University authority. 5.3.1.2 Vandalism or the deliberate destruction of property belonging to any member of the DLSU community including visitors on campus. 5.3.1.3 Carrying or possession of a deadly weapon inside the University premises or outside the University during an academic function or activity without securing a permit from the University Safety Office and/or Security Office in consultation with SDFO. 5.3.1.4 Deliberate disruption of the academic function or a university activity that tends to create disorder, tumult, breach of peace or serious disturbance not necessarily connected with any academic function or university activity. 5.3.1.5 Brawls within the University premises or outside the University during an academic function or activity. 5.3.1.6 Direct assault or inflicting physical injuries on any person inside or outside the University during an academic function or activity. 5.3.1.7 Unauthorized bringing in, carrying, possession or use of prohibited or regulated drugs or chemicals without proper prescription, inside University premises or outside the University during an academic function or activity, and any other violation of the provisions of Republic Act 9165, otherwise known as the “Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002.” 61 5.3.1.8 Unauthorized bringing in, possession or drinking of liquor or alcoholic beverages inside the University premises or outside the University during an academic function or activity or entering the University premises or attending academic functions or activities under the influence of liquor or alcoholic beverages. Students are considered under the influence of liquor if they are found to have had an alcohol intake regardless of the amount. 5.3.1.9 Gross acts of disrespect in words or in deed that tend to put the University or any administrator, faculty member, co-academic personnel, security guard, maintenance personnel, student, and visitor in ridicule or contempt. 5.3.1.10 Threatening others with any act amounting to a crime, delict or wrong, or with the infliction of any injury or harm upon their persons, honor, or integrity. 5.3.1.11 Acts of lewdness or commission of any act of immorality such as but not limited to the following: being inside a cubicle of a comfort room with another person regardless of gender or sex; necking or petting; viewing, reading, displaying or distributing pornographic materials inside the University (unless with SDFO permit and endorsed by the faculty member concerned as part of a course requirement), including accessing Internet sites that do not correlate to any specific subject or course within the University. 5.3.1.12 Acts that bring the name of the University into disrepute such as public and malicious imputation of a crime, or of a vice or defect, real or imaginary, or any act, omission, condition, status

or circumstance, tending to cause dishonor, discredit or contempt to 62 the name of the University. 5.3.1.13 Unjust enrichment; stealing whether attempted, frustrated, or consummated; or failure to turn over items to the SDFO Lost and Found Section. 5.3.1.14 Unauthorized collection or extraction of money, checks or other instruments as equivalent of money, which includes but is not limited to, matters pertaining to the University. Failure to deposit collected, solicited funds from official activities to the organization’s in-campus depository account no later than three (3) working days. Any unauthorized actions relating to the deposit of the collected money, in an individual’s personal or non-recognized bank account. 5.3.1.15 Forging, falsifying, or tampering with academic or official records or documents of any kind; or intentionally making a false statement of any material fact or practicing fraud or deception in connection with anything that pertains to the University. 5.3.1.16 Gambling in any form inside the University, including betting in any form in the UAAP, NBA, or any other games or events. This also applies to academic functions or activities conducted outside the University. 5.3.1.17 Conviction before any court for a criminal offense involving moral turpitude, against person or property other than through reckless imprudence. 5.3.1.18 Planning and/or Execution of the Hazing and/or any violent activity. As outlined in Republic Act 11053, any student found to be responsible for being directly involved in 63 the planning or execution of hazing will be penalized. 5.3.1.18.1 Students who are found to be present in the planning or execution of hazing and failed to take action to halt the planning, prevent the execution, or alert proper authorities such as, but not limited to, the school administration or law enforcement authorities. 5.3.1.18.2 Students found to knowingly cooperate with carrying out the hazing activities. 5.3.1.19 Attempt to Conceal or Hide Acts of Hazing and/or any violent activity. Any attempt to hide, conceal, or otherwise obstruct ongoing investigations about cases related to hazing will be penalized. 5.3.1.20 Activities that Result in Violence. All interactions among students, fraternities, sororities, and any recognized and unrecognized organization which result in violence, such as but not limited to, hazing, brawls, fist fights, etc., thereby exposing the studentry and the University to harm, physical danger, and damage to property. 5.3.1.21 Willful failure to comply with summonses or notices issued for purposes of investigation conducted in connection with discipline- related offenses. 5.3.1.22 Hazing or physical injuries committed as a result of an initiation rite or practice as a prerequisite for admission into membership in a fraternity, sorority, or organization by placing the recruit neophytes or applicants in embarrassing or humiliating situations, such as forcing them to do menial, silly, foolish, and similar tasks or activities or otherwise subjecting them to physical or psychological suffering or injury (as stipulated in Republic Act No. 8049 and as amended in Republic Act 11053 or the 64 Anti-Hazing Act of 2018) For this purpose, the members who were present shall be liable whether they participated or not. The officers of

the organization, society or group, shall also be liable, whether or not they were present during the hazing incident. 5.3.1.23 Perjury, defined as testifying falsely in any administrative proceeding, or knowingly making untruthful statements on documents under oath when such oath is required. 5.3.1.24 Possession or causing the explosion of firecrackers inside the University or outside the University during academic functions or activities, unless authorized by the Vice President for Administration. 5.3.1.25 Lending ID to another or using someone else’s ID. 5.3.1.26 Making sexual advances in words or deeds to another student or to any member of the academic community. 5.3.1.27 Illegal or unauthorized reproduction of University materials. 5.3.1.28 Such other acts as may be determined by University authorities upon consultation with student representatives, provided the application is prospective and properly disseminated to students through official student media, official DLSU Website announcements, or both. 5.3.1.29 Repetitive and or willful violation of established policies, rules, or regulations consisting in the commission of three (3) minor offenses of the same kind or nature, or five (5) minor offenses of different kinds or nature. 5.3.1.30 Violation of the De La Salle University Policies on Intellectual Property (I.P.) (Please refer to Appendix M) 65 5.3.1.31 Scalping or selling of UAAP and other events’ tickets at a price higher than the prescribed or approved amount. 5.3.1.32 Bullying another in any form or violation of any of the provisions of the Republic Act 10627 or Anti-Bullying Act of 2013. 5.3.1.33 Rape, any form of sexual assault, or abuse (as defined in Republic Act 8353 or the Anti- Rape Law of 1997 and in Republic Act 9262 or the Anti-Violence against Women and their Children Act of 2004). 5.3.1.34 Acts that cause emotional and psychological distress such as but not limited to annoyance or mischief (Unjust vexation as defined in Article 287 of Revised Penal Code). 5.3.1.35 Violation of the Data Privacy Act (as defined in Republic Act 10173 or the Data Privacy Act of 2012). 5.3.1.36 Violation of policies on legal review of contracts and on signatory authority of contracts. 5.3.1.37 Commission of any cybercrime offense as defined under Republic Act 10175 or the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012, such as: 5.3.1.37.1 Offenses against the confidentiality, integrity and availability of computer data and systems (e.g., illegal access, data or system interference, misuse of devices, cyber-squatting) 5.3.1.37.2 Computer related offenses (e.g., forgery, computer fraud, identity theft) 5.3.1.37.3 Content related offenses: (e.g., cybersex, child pornography, unsolicited commercial communications 66 5.3.1.37.4 Cyber Libel. (Article 355 of the Revised Penal Code by means of computer system) 5.3.1.37.5 Other offenses (e.g., aiding or abetting cybercrimes) 5.3.1.38 Direct or indirect offering, promising or giving of gifts, money or other things of value in exchange for any favor or the performance of an act or omission that violates University regulations, or in expectation of favor in the future. 5.3.1.39 Any kind of provocation that results in heated verbal or physical confrontation between students and groups of students. 5.3.1.40 The act of taking, creating,

or having possession of photos or videos of any member of the academic community in digital or physical format, or of a database containing the same, without the latter’s consent or an official authorization from the University, including but not limited to: 5.3.1.40.1 Recording of classes, meetings, conferences, interviews, activities, or any conversation with any member of the academic community 5.3.1.40.2 Posting or sharing in any messaging, social media, video streaming, storage, or database platform of any recording of classes, meetings, conferences, interviews, conversations, photos, or videos of any member of the academic community. 5.3.1.40.3 Sharing of electronic access or link to any curricular or co-curricular activities or to a database containing any such photo, video, or audio recording of any member of the academic community. 67 5.3.1.41 Any and all acts of discrimination against any member of the academic community for having any real or perceived mental health condition as defined by Section 4(e) and 4(k) of Republic Act 11036, otherwise known as the Philippine Mental Health Act of 2017 (e) Discrimination refers to any distinction, exclusion or restriction which has the purpose or effect of nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social cultural, civil or any other field. (k) Mental Health Condition refers to a neurologic or psychiatric condition characterized by the existence of a recognizable, clinically- significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation, or behavior that reflects a genetic or acquired dysfunction in the neurological, psychosocial, or developmental process underlying mental functioning. The determination of neurologic and psychiatric conditions shall be based on scientifically-accepted medical nomenclature and best available scientific and medical evidence. 5.3.1.42 Any student who, by any form of speech, publication, or communication, willfully makes a threat or maliciously conveys, communicates, or disseminates false information (i.e., any information that is meant to intimidate or harass), knowing the same to be false, concerning an attempt or 68 plan being made to kill, injure, or intimidate any person or to unlawfully damage any property by means of explosives, incendiary device, or other similar destructive force or method against the person or property of any member of the academic community. 5.3.2 Minor Offenses 5.3.2.1 Simple acts of disrespect in words or in deed committed against any administrator, faculty member, co-academic personnel, security guard, maintenance personnel, student, and visitor. 5.3.2.2 Acts that disturb peace and order short of being a major offense such as disturbing classes, academic-related activities, or university functions. 5.3.2.3 Disobeying school regulations and other rules approved by University authorities, provided they are properly disseminated to students through official student media with monthly circulation, through official DLSU Website announcements, or both. 5.3.2.4 Disobeying classroom policies and procedures. 5.3.2.5 Refusal to present an ID or temporary campus pass when asked by University authorities. 5.3.2.6 Proselytizing, defined as an attempt to convert another to one’s faith by attacking or denigrating other person’s practices and beliefs, or by offering special inducements. 5.3.2.7

Littering. 5.3.2.8 Selling items, engaging in business, or soliciting contributions or donations on campus without prior approval of authority. 5.3.2.9 Preventing the circulation of a recognized student media by withholding or removing a substantial number of copies from the news 69 bins. 5.3.2.10 Public Display of Physical Intimacy (PDPI). 5.3.2.11 Violation of policies of the Information Technology Services (ITS) such as but not limited to accessing unauthorized software or web applications and the like, playing any form of games, and using cellular phones and other electronic communication devices in computer laboratories. 5.3.2.12 Use of classrooms and other school facilities for any purpose without any reservation or proper authorization. 5.3.2.13 Loitering along the classroom corridors while classes are going on for second and succeeding violations. 5.3.2.14 Second and succeeding violations of the eating policy wherein eating and drinking other than water in areas designated as a non-eating place such as auditoriums, seminar rooms, classrooms (except light snacks such as biscuits and candies) laboratories, libraries, chapels, and study areas inside the buildings (unless otherwise approved by University authorities) 5.3.2.15 Smoking, including e-cigarettes, inside University premises, along Agno and F. Reyes Sts. until E. Razon Sports Complex Bldg., or outside the University during academic functions or school activities. In the Laguna Campus, this includes all University premises including Residence Halls, and the University Drive and parking lots. In the Taguig (BGC) Campus, this includes all University premises including the University Drive and parking lots. 5.3.2.16 Playing of electronic, board and card games 70 outside official University activities and academic requirement in auditoriums, seminar rooms, classrooms, laboratories, libraries, chapels, and study areas inside the buildings. 5.3.2.17 Violation of policies on the use of lockers. 5.3.2.18 Unhygienic and improper use of University facilities. 5.3.2.19 Second and succeeding violations of policies on the lending of calculators from SDFO. 5.3.2.20 Second and succeeding violations of policies on the use of University parking slots. 5.3.2.21 Entering any restricted area within the University without prior permission or authority. A restricted area is one that is designated as such by the proper authorities and marked with proper signage. 5.3.2.22 Bringing cutters, pointed scissors and laboratory instruments not duly endorsed by a faculty member or an elected USG/ CSO/GSC officer and without the necessary permit from SDFO in coordination with the Security Office. 5.3.2.23 Violation of the De La Salle University Policy and Guidelines on the use of Trademarks (Please refer to Appendix N). 5.3.2.24 Failure to surrender the campus pass within five (5) days from issuance. 5.3.2.25 Entering the campus without the school ID, the following policy will be observed: 5th (1st minor) - The Student will be required to attend a formation program. 10th (2nd minor) – The Student will be required to render eight (8) hours of 71 University service. 15th (1st major) - The incident will already be processed as a major offense subject to the proceedings or rules established by SDFO in its Manual of Operations. For cases of lost IDs, a student is given three

(3) working days to secure a new ID. Entering the campus without an ID after the given period will be counted as entering the campus without the school ID. 5.3.2.26 Fifth and succeeding violations of the Implementing Guidelines on the University Attire Policy. 5.3.2.27 Third and succeeding failure or refusal to present University issued ID/ Campus Pass inside the University premises or campus. 5.3.2.28 Refusal to undergo random drug testing required by the government and the University. 5.3.2.29 Failure to comply with the established policies of DLSU-managed dormitories in addition to those that have been already specifically provided in this Student Handbook. 5.4 Corrective Measures and Formative Interventions 5.4.1 For Major Violations The corrective measures and formative interventions for major offenses are the following: 5.4.1.1 Probation for such time and under such conditions8 as the SDFB or UPCC may determine. 8 Conditions may include undergoing the Strengthening Attitudes through Values Enhancement & Development (SAVED) Program or Formation on Restructuring and Managing the Self (FORMS) Program; personal mentoring; rendering University service; attendance in relevant seminar/s or learning session/s; counseling; psychological and/or behavioral evaluation; drug testing, etc. 72 5.4.1.2 Suspension for such time and under such conditions as the SDFB or UPCC may determine. 5.4.1.3 Dismissal 5.4.1.4 Expulsion 5.4.2 Minor Violations The corrective measures and formative interventions for minor violations are the following: 5.4.2.1 For the first offense, written warning from the Director of SDFO 5.4.2.2 In case of a second offense, a written reprimand from the Director of SDFO upon submission of a written letter from parent/s or guardian. The parent/s or guardian of the student concerned may be invited by the SDFO Director for a case conference to discuss the discipline record of the student. In case of third and succeeding offenses, the student is charged with a major offense under Sec. 5.3.1.29, if applicable; otherwise, a written reprimand from the Director of SDFO upon submission of a written letter from parent/s or guardian. The parent/s or guardian of the student may be invited again by the SDFO Director for a case conference to discuss the discipline record of the student. In any event the student may be required to attend a formation session depending on the assessed needs and the nature of the violation; submit a written apology letter addressed to the offended party (if the act is personal in nature); referred to OCCS; ordered the restitution or reparation of the damage or injury sustained (if necessary); or all. 5.4.3 For offenses whose reach is increased because of online visibility, then the Board may impose a higher penalty. 73 5.5 Definition of Terms As used in this section the term – 5.5.1 Student refers to a person who, at the time of commission of the offense, is: 5.5.1.1 Enrolled in any subject or course in the University, regardless of the number of units enrolled. 5.5.1.2 Included in the official student list of the Office of the University Registrar (OUR), whether enrolled, on official leave of absence (LOA), on residency,

or absence without leave (AWOL). 5.5.1.3 Allowed to graduate from the University but has not yet secured the required clearances from the University. 5.5.2 University premises refer to the territorial boundaries of De La Salle University Manila, Laguna, and Taguig (BGC) Campuses, including the academic and non- academic buildings, the parking lots adjacent to it as well as immediate sidewalks within a periphery of five (5) meters from gates, fences or dividing walls of buildings and within a periphery of two hundred (200) meters. The coverage of the 200-meter peripheral in DLSU Manila Campus jurisdiction are: • From Sports Complex to DLSU Female Athletes’ Dorm (Fidel Reyes St.) • From DLSU Facade to 944 Maligaya St. (after Dagonoy) marked by a post • From South Gate to the street across Starbucks (up to the power source of LRT) • From Biological Garden to front of SMDC Condominium (formerly Harrison Plaza) • In the DLSU-Laguna Campus, this covers the University Drive and adjacent open spaces surrounding the campus. 74 • In the Taguig (BGC) Campus, this covers the University Drive and adjacent open spaces surrounding the campus. The following offenses are considered within the territorial boundaries of the University: 5.5.2.1 Brawls, as defined in Section 5.3.1.5; 5.5.2.2 Inflicting physical injuries on another as defined in Section 5.3.1.6; 5.5.2.3 Unauthorized bringing in, carrying, possession or use of drugs or chemicals as defined in Section 5.3.1.7; 5.5.2.4 Vandalism or destruction of property belonging to another, as defined in Section 5.3.1.2; 5.5.2.5 Direct assault as defined in Section 5.3.1.6; 5.5.2.6 Threatening another as defined in Section 5.3.1.10; 5.5.2.7 Unjust enrichment as defined in Section 5.3.1.13; 5.5.2.8 Making sexual advances as defined in Section 5.3.1.26; 5.5.2.9 Gambling as defined in Section 5.3.1.16; 5.5.2.10 Drinking of liquor or alcoholic beverages in public establishments; 5.5.2.11 Rape, any form of sexual assault, or abuse (as defined in the Republic Act 8353 or the Anti-Rape Law of 1997 and the Republic Act 9262 or the Anti- Violence Against Women and their Children as defined in Section 5.3.1.33; 5.5.2.12 Act that causes emotional and psychological distress such as but not limited to annoyance or mischief (Unjust vexation as defined in Article 287 of Revised 75 Penal Code) as defined in Section 5.3.1.34; 5.5.2.13 Any act of facilitating, recruiting, or soliciting support for an unrecognized organization that subscribes or participates in any illegal act or that violates any University policy. 5.5.3 “In flagrante” means the very act of committing a discipline offense or the condition of being caught in the act of committing the offense. 5.5.4 “Ex-parte hearing” refers to a hearing held in the absence of one of the parties. 5.5.5 “Illegal demonstration” includes a public show of feeling or opinion as by a mass meeting or parade accompanied by force, coercion, or violence. 5.5.6 “Deadly weapons” include but are not limited to firearms (including spring-type, air, powder, and similar mechanism), explosives (e.g., firecrackers, pyrotechnics), stones, lead pipes, and sharp or cutting instruments (e.g., pointed scissors, ice picks, Swiss knives

or blades of any length), with the exception of cutters and laboratory instruments that are commonly used for academic purposes; provided that in the exceptional case, the one who brought the same shall be equally responsible with the person who inappropriately used it. Any similar object shall be considered deadly weapons if used to inflict physical injury or cause death. Tear gas, pepper spray, and similar sprays normally used for self- defense are allowed inside the campus provided that the one who brought the same inside shall be equally responsible with the student who inappropriately used said spray, except in case of coercion which must be duly proven. 5.5.7 “Unjust enrichment” means any condition where students take a thing at the expense of another for their benefit regardless of his intent to gain. 76 Section 6: STUDENT GRIEVANCE Students of De La Salle University have the right to air their complaints and/or grievances against any member of the Lasallian Community. Grievances are best settled through sincere dialogue and discussion between the parties to a grievance, befitting a Lasallian academic community. Formal grievance may be pursued only as a last resort after efforts for informal complaints and mediation have been exhausted through student-teacher dialogues. The procedures in handling informal complaints and formal grievances are outlined in this section. For assistance, students are encouraged to reach out to the University Student Government (for undergraduate students) or the Graduate Student Council (for graduate students). 6.1 Definition of Terms. 1. Informal Complaint – A complaint communicated verbally by a student or groups of students, whether through face-to-face or in online meetings, to any member of the Lasallian community. 2. Academic Grievance – A formal grievance that succeeds the informal complaint process regarding any controversy related to learning or to performance in academic courses. It must be put into written form and duly signed to be considered a formal grievance. 3. Behavioral Grievance – A formal grievance that succeeds the informal complaint process regarding any controversy related to the manner a person conducts themself. It must be put into written form and duly signed to be considered a formal grievance. 4. Complainant – The student who launches or files the complaint or grievance. 5. Respondent – The person whom the complaint or grievance is filed against. 6. Group/Class Grievance – A student, group or class may raise a grievance. A grievance raised by three (3) or more students is considered a group grievance. A grievance raised by 50% + 1 of enrolled students in a certain class is considered a class grievance. In cases where 50%+1 are less than three (3), then this will be considered as a class grievance. 77 7. Appeal – It is a remedy when a party is dissatisfied with the resolution of their case. They can submit an appeal to the Ad Hoc Grievance Board after the resolution of the Department Chair. Should they be dissatisfied with the decision of the Dean from the recommendation of the Ad Hoc Grievance

Board then they may file an appeal to the Provost. Should they be also dissatisfied with the decision of the Provost, then they may file an appeal to the University President. 8. Confidentiality – It refers to personal information and details of the case shared by the concerned parties that generally cannot be divulged to third parties without the express consent of the concerned parties. 6.2 The Ad Hoc Grievance Board 6.2.1 Principal Function The Ad HocGrievance Board (Board) is a quasi-judicial body that hears and decides all grievance cases filed by a student, group or class against any member of the faculty brought to the college level in accordance with the defined procedures. 6.2.2 Composition The Board shall be composed of the following: 1. The Associate Dean of the College to which the faculty belongs, as the Chair of the Board; 2. Senior Faculty Member of the Department to which the faculty belongs; 3. The President of the University Student Government (for undergraduate students) or the President of the Graduate Student Council (for graduate students); 4. The College President (for undergraduate students) or the Graduate College President (for graduate students) of the College to which the student complainant belongs; and 78 5. The President of the Association of Faculty and Educators of DLSU (AFED). 6. The Chairperson of the Department to which the grieved faculty belongs shall serve as a resource person of board proceedings. Other agreed individuals may be invited as resource persons if the need arises. 6.2.3 Powers The Board shall exercise the following powers: 6.2.3.1 Define the procedures to be followed in the conduct of its hearings; 6.2.3.2 Summon witnesses or persons whose assistance is needed in arriving at a just and fair decision; 6.2.3.3 Access all information relevant to the case; 6.2.3.4 Recommend to the Dean appropriate measures consistent to its findings; and 6.2.3.5 Exercise fairness and objectivity in hearing the merits of the case, without prejudice to either the complainant or the defendant.. 6.3 Procedures in Grievance Cases 6.3.1 Informal Complaints If a crisis arises, students are encouraged to seek the assistance of the USG through their respective Judiciary Student Advisers and/or batch representatives (for undergraduate students) or their GSC College President (for graduate students), regarding the process of initiating an informal complaint. 6.3.2 Formal Grievance In the event a student decides to pursue a formal grievance, after availing the informal complaint process, the steps to be taken are as follows: 6.3.2.1 Grievance of a Student Against a Faculty Member 79 The procedures to be followed in handling grievance cases filed by students against faculty members are: 6.3.2.1.1 If an undergraduate, the student shall approach the Director of the Student Advisers from the University Student Government’s Judiciary Department who shall course the complaint and assign a Student Adviser upon the request of the student. If the student is a graduate student, the student shall approach their Graduate Student Council Officer who shall help the student with regards to filing a formal grievance. 6.3.2.1.2 Grievance

The student files a written grievance with the Department Chair to which the concerned faculty member belongs to at any time during the term, but not later than four calendar weeks (28 calendar days) after Grade Consultation Day. The grievance should be signed by the student and accomplished in three (3) copies to be distributed as follows: • Original: Department Chair; • One (1) copy: Faculty Member (respondent); and • One (1) copy: Student File duly received by the Department Chair (or any representative) A formal grievance should contain the following: 80 • The name of the faculty member against whom the grievance is filed; • A narration of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the act complained of with supporting evidences or documents attached; • The specific action asked for from the faculty member and the University, and; • The specific policy that allegedly has been violated. 6.3.2.1.3 Answer 6.3.2.1.3.1 Within three (3) working days from receipt of the grievance, the Department Chair writes (either through email or formal letter) to the faculty member concerned to respond in writing, within three (3) working days from receipt of the notice. The written answer shall also be prepared in three (3) copies to be distributed as follows: • Original: Department Chair • One (1) copy: Faculty member file • One (1) copy: Student as complainant 6.3.2.1.3.2 Failure of the respondent to answer the complaint in writing within the period required shall mean waiver of the right to respond, and the Department 81 Chair shall resolve the complaint on the strength of the available evidence. 6.3.2.1.3.3 Upon receipt of the written answer by the respondent, the Department Chair evaluates the complaint and the answer. The department chair may find it necessary to ask for clarification. In this case, the Department Chair shall call the parties to a meeting for this purpose within three (3) working days from receipt of the written answer. 6.3.2.1.3.4 Within three (3) working days after the meeting and from determination that sufficient facts and evidence exist on which to base a resolution, the Department Chair resolves the case. The resolution shall be in writing stating the supporting reasons and prepared in three (3) copies to be distributed as follows: • Original: Department file • One (1) copy: Student (complainant) • One (1) copy: Faculty Member (respondent) 6.3.3 Class or Group Grievance The students involved in a group or class grievance must elect an official group representative and affix their respective signatures in the Summary of Events document. Afterwards, they must proceed with the appropriate grievance procedure. 82 6.4 Appeal and Escalation of Case 6.4.1 Appeal to the Ad Hoc Grievance Board A party not satisfied with the resolution of the Department Chair may appeal the resolution to the Ad Hoc Grievance Board in writing, within three (3) working days from receipt of the resolution. The appeal shall be taken in accordance with these procedures: 6.4.1.1 The appellant sends a letter to the Dean of the faculty concerned requesting

that the Board be convened to hear the grievance complaint. 6.4.1.2 Upon receipt of the letter, the Chair of the Adhoc Grievance Board requires the Department Chair concerned, in writing, to endorse the case and all pertinent documents to the Board within three (3) working days. 6.4.1.3 Upon receipt of the complete record of the case, the Chair of the Adhoc Grievance Board immediately convenes the Board for the purpose of hearing the case. 6.4.1.4 Before the deliberation of the case, the Board first defines the procedures it will follow in hearing the case except that: 6.4.1.4.1 For the hearing to commence, the board must be in a majority (50%+1) quorum as long as both faculty and student sectors are represented. 6.4.1.4.2 The parties concerned may request the presence of a counsel who could be but is not limited to any member of the Lasallian Community, to provide them advice during the grievance proceedings. Said counsels shall not be allowed to participate during the proceedings. 83 • The Director of the Student Advisers from the University Student Government – Judiciary Department, at the request of an undergraduate student appellant, shall assist in the process of filing the appeal. • If the student is a graduate student, the Executive Board of the College Graduate Student Council shall assist in the process. 6.4.1.4.3 Hearings shall be held on a regular basis and shall not last for more than six (6) working days from the date of the first hearing. 6.4.1.4.4 Only evidence (testimonial or documentary) related to the allegations of the complainant shall be considered during the hearings. 6.4.1.4.5 The complainant shall have their right to retract the formal grievance before the Board makes its recommendation. 6.4.1.4.6 Within five (5) working days from the date of last hearing, the Board shall meet to deliberate on the case and to arrive at a recommendation. Majority of the members of the Board is required to arrive at a recommendation. 6.4.1.4.7 Copies of the recommendation of the Board shall be furnished to all the parties concerned including the members of the Board. A copy of the final recommendation is also filed in 84 the 201 files of the respondent. 6.4.1.4.8 The Dean of the College shall act on the Board’s recommendation within three (3) working days from receipt. Their decision shall be put in writing. Copies of which shall be distributed as follows: • Original: Dean • One (1) copy: Complainant • One (1) copy: Respondent • One (1) copy: Each member of the Board • One (1) copy: Dean of Student Affairs 6.4.2 Appeal to the Provost A party not satisfied with the decision of the Dean may appeal the decision to the Office of the Provost, in writing, within five (5) working days from receipt of the written decision of the Dean. Within five (5) working days from receipt of the appeal, the Provost shall decide the appeal and shall notify the parties of the decision in writing. The decision of the Provost

is final and executory unless the execution is deferred for meritorious reasons. 6.4.3 Appeal to the University President A party not satisfied with the decision of the Provost may appeal to the University President, in writing, within five (5) working days from the receipt of the written decision. If a decision of the Provost is not appealed within the period provided, the decision 85 becomes final and immediately executory unless execution is deferred for meritorious reasons. Within five (5) working days from receipt of the appeal, the President shall decide the appeal and shall notify the parties of the decision in writing. The decision of the President is final and executory unless the execution is deferred for meritorious reasons. 6.5 Other Types of Complaints The student may approach the USG for assistance and/or file a formal letter of complaint to the respective office. Here are the following types: 1. Against another Student - The letter must be sent and addressed to the Director of the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO). 2. Against Non-Teaching Personnel - The letter must be sent to the Unit Head or Department Chair, endorsed by the Dean of Student Affairs. 3. Against a Department Chair, Assistant Dean, or Associate Dean 4. Against a Dean - The letter must be sent and addressed to the Provost. 5. Against Administrators - The letter must be sent and addressed to the immediate supervisor. 6. Against a Vice-President - The letter must be sent ad addressed to the University President. 7. Against the Provost - The letter must be sent 86 and addressed to the University President. 8. Against the University President - The letter must be sent and addressed to the Chair of the Board of Trustees. 6.5.1 The complaint should be signed by the student and accomplished in three copies to be distributed as follows: • Original: The Unit Head of the office concerned; • One (1) copy: Respondent; and • One (1) copy: Student file duly received and dated by any representative from the respective office 6.5.2 The complaint must contain the following: • The name of the concerned party (student, faculty member, specific office) for whom the complaint is filed against; • A narration of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the act that was complained of with the supporting evidence/s or document/s attached; • The specific action or solution asked for from the concerned party (student, faculty member, specific office) and the University; and • The specific department or University policy that was allegedly violated. 6.5.3 Acknowledgment and Written Answer of the Respondent. Within five (5) working days from receipt of the complaint, the respective Unit Head writes the respondent to answer the complaint in writing, within five (5) working days from receipt of the notice. The written answer shall also be prepared in three (3) copies to be distributed as follows: • One (1) copy for the office concerned; • One (1) copy for the respondent; and • One (1) copy for the Student

as the complainant. 87 6.5.4 Failure of the respondent to answer the complaint in writing within the period required shall allow the respective office concerned to resolve the complaint on the strength of the current pieces of evidence . The failure to respond shall mean waiver of the respondent’s right to explain their side. The respondent may still file subsequent motions. 6.5.5 Clarificatory Meeting between the Complainant and Respondent Upon receipt of the written answer by the respondent, the office concerned evaluates the complaint and the answer. The office concerned may find it necessary to ask for clarification. In this case, the Unit Head shall call the parties to a meeting for this purpose within three (3) days from receipt of the written answer. 6.5.6 Resolution of the Case Within ten (10) days after the meeting and from the determination that sufficient facts and evidence exist on which to base a resolution, the office concerned resolves the case. The resolution shall be in writing stating the supporting reasons and prepared in three (3) copies to be distributed as follows: • Original: Office or Department file • One (1) copy: Student (complainant) • One (1) copy: Member of the Academic Community (respondent) 6.5.7 The University is committed to the prevention of gender-based sexual harassment and discrimination of students and the fulfillment of the promotion of the value and dignity of every human person and full respect for human rights; 6.5.7.1 Submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term or condition for a student’s educational advancement; 88 6.5.7.2 Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a student is used as the basis for academic consideration affecting the student; and 6.5.7.3 Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with a student’s academic performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive educational environment. 6.5.8 Any student who intends to file a gender-based sexual harassment and/or discrimination complaint should follow the steps outlined in the DLSU Safe Spaces Policy found in Appendix I and seek the assistance of the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well- being (LCIDWell). 6.6 Procedures Common to Sections 6.5 and 6.6 The complaint, answer, memorandum, recommendation, decision, as well as transcripts of all proceedings should be in writing and signed by all parties concerned. 89 2 Undergraduate Section 7: FEES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND PAYMENTS 7.1 Tuition and special fees are posted on the administrative bulletin boards and the DLSU website prior to and during the enrollment period. It is the student’s responsibility to know the prescribed fees, scholarship grants, and payment policies. 7.2 The University, through the Office of Admissions and Scholarships (OAS), offers scholarships to deserving students who pass the screening process. The various scholarship and financial assistance programs are enumerated in Appendix C, under Scholarships. Interested students may check the DLSU website or send inquiries through scholarships@dlsu.edu.ph for more information. 7.2.1 Loans are available to students with at least one (1) term of enrollment at the University and who cannot meet the

regular deadline for payments of tuition and fees. After the deadline for loan payment, a 1% interest per month shall be imposed on the outstanding loan. Student loan applications do not entail any processing fee. 7.2.2 Students may avail of a loan every term, provided that any previous loan balance has been fully paid. However, student loan approvals are still subject to availability of University funds. 7.2.3 To enroll for the next trimester, loans obtained for a current trimester must be settled one week before the scheduled date of online enrollment for the succeeding trimester. 7.3 Undergraduate students may also approach the University Student Government to apply for the Student Government Assistant Fund (SGAF), a project of the University Student Government-Office of the Executive Treasurer that provides 0% interest loans to DLSU students. SGAF provides loan opportunities such as calamity, thesis and emergency loans. 90 Students may approach the Office of the Executive Treasurer for more information on the procedure for application for and payment of SGAF. 7.4 All refund checks pertaining to undergraduate students will be payable to the parent/guardian on record. The release of student refund checks for those who dropped until the second week of classes will start on Week 5 of the trimester and for those who dropped after the second week will start on Week 10 of the trimester. Refund checks for ineligibles, complete withdrawals and other cases shall be made available ten (10) working days from receipt of the memo from the Office of the University Registrar. Claims for refund are made according to the Manual of Regulations for Private Higher Education of the Commission on Higher Education (2008). When students register in a school, it is understood that they are enrolling for the entire academic year for elementary and secondary courses, and for the entire semester for collegiate courses. Students who transfer or otherwise withdraw, in writing, within two (2) weeks after the beginning of classes and who have already paid the pertinent tuition and other school fees in full for any length longer than one month, will be charged a retention fee of 10 percent of the total amount due for the term if they withdraw within the first week of classes, or a 50 percent retention fee if within the second week of classes, regardless of whether or not they have actually attended classes. Students may be charged all the school fees in full if they withdraw any time after the second week of classes. 7.5 Deadlines for payment of tuition and fees are posted on the administrative bulletin boards and printed on the student’s Enrollment Assessment Form (EAF). Students with outstanding balances from previous trimesters will not be accommodated for current transactions unless they settle their previous accounts. 7.6 Leave of Absence (LOA) A student who files for a leave of absence will be refunded if they submit their LOA form within the following dates: 7.6.1 Before start of classes (Total payment less registration fee) 91 7.6.2 First Week of

the trimester (90% of the total assessment) 7.6.3 Second Week of the trimester (50% of the total assessment). No refund will be made after the Second Week of the trimester except when the student is considered ineligible. In this case, the refund will be 100% of the total assessment or in the case of an installment basis, the amount to be refunded will be the amount paid by the student. A student who paid on installment basis and eventually files for a leave of absence after the second week of classes will still have to pay the balance of the tuition and fees. 7.7 Returned Checks The responsibility of ensuring the check is well-funded rests with the students. They should verify that their check has been honored by the bank and, in case it has been dishonored, should settle their account immediately by paying in cash or manager’s check. Failure to do so will automatically result to the deletion of the student’s name from the official enrollment list. The student who paid within the regular enrollment period and whose check was subsequently dishonored will incur a penalty of PHP 500.00. The following additional charges will be imposed if the said check was replaced within the following dates: Within the first week of classes: PHP 200.00 Within the second week of classes: PHP 300.00 After the second week of classes: PHP 300.00 + PHP 100.00 / delayed working day Students whose checks have been dishonored twice during their entire stay at the University may no longer make subsequent payments using checks. Only cash and manager’s check will be accepted. 7.8 Personal Accident Insurance Every student is covered by a Personal Accident Insurance. The coverage is for 24 hours, on and off campus, and for injuries caused by the accident. 92 The following are covered by the insurance: 1. Accidental Death and Dismemberment; 2. Medical Reimbursement; 3. Burial Expense; and 4. Murder and Unprovoked Assault. 7.9 The following procedure should be followed when availing of student insurance: 7.9.1 Submit soft copies of the required documents to the 1911 Insurance Agency Corp. (IAC) via 1911Insurance@ delasalle.ph. 7.9.2 IAC personnel will review the documents and coordinate with the claimants to submit the ORIGINAL hard copies at their office located at the Ground Floor of Br. John Hall. 7.9.3 In cases of accidental death or murder or death by any cause, the following documents are required: 1. Name of student and parent/relative (Claimant) 2. Original Sunlife Grepa Financial (SLGFI) Claimant’s Statement Form to be accomplished by the beneficiary who is 18 years old or above; if below 18, by the guardian – Form will be provided by 1911 IAC 3. Original/Original Certified True Copy of Death Certificate with seal and issued by the Local Civil Registrar/PSA 4. Photocopy of Birth Certificate of Insured student 7.9.4 In cases of injury (reimbursement of medical expenses) 1. Medical Certificate; 2. Accident Report or Police Report; and 3. Original copy of Official Receipts of expenses (e.g., hospital bills, professional

fee of doctors, medicine). 7.9.5 Claim the check after two weeks at the Finance and Accounting Office (FAO). 93 7.10 Exclusions from the insurance coverage include the following: Suicide, bacterial infections, certain murder and assault, war or organized hostilities, strikes, nuclear radiation, professional athletics, mountaineering, scuba diving, aerial sports, racing, and mine cave-ins. 7.11 All financial transactions should be made through the Finance and Accounting Office (FAO). MODE OF PAYING TUITION AND FEES 7.12 Cash, Personal Check or Manager’s Check 7.12.1 Post-dated, state-dated, and/or overstated checks are not accepted. 7.12.2 Check must be replaced in case of alteration. 7.12.3 The following information should be written correctly on the back of the check: student’s full name, ID number, degree program/college, telephone/mobile number, and home address. 7.12.4 The Student Services Section of the Finance and Accounting Office will automatically cancel the official receipt of those whose checks were returned or dishonored by the bank for whatever reason. 7.12.5 Replacement for returned or dishonored checks shall be in cash or manager’s check and shall be paid to the Cashier at the Finance and Accounting Office only. 7.13 Credit/Debit Card Payment (onsite) 7.13.1 Any Mastercard or VISA card through straight payment is acceptable as mode of payment for tuition and fees. Only one (1) swipe per card and up to a maximum of two (2) credit cards are allowed per student. 7.13.2 Credit card installment schemes are acceptable through the following banks: Citibank (Paylite), BPI (Special Installment Plan), and BDO (Easy Pay). 7.13.3 Payment through credit card may be made only to the Cashier at the FAO. 7.13.4 The credit card holder or owner is required to be present during payment to sign the credit card transaction slips. 94 7.14 Online through: 1. DLSU’s Online Payment Gateway (OPG) using VISA and Mastercard credit cards and debit cards 2. Dragonpay 7.15 Over-the-counter (OTC) payment at any branch of BDO, METROBANK, RCBC, UNIONBANK, selected LANDBANK branches (P. Ocampo Branch only) indicating the following details: 1. Name of Bank : Banco De Oro (BDO) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University – Manila Institution Code : 1125 2. Name of Bank : Metrobank (MBTC) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University Inc. Institution Code : 921 3. Name of Bank : Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation (RCBC) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University – Manila 4. Name of Bank : Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) – P. Ocampo Branch Biller’s Name : De La Salle University, Inc. 5. Name of Bank : UnionBank (UBP) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University, Inc. 7.16 For more details, please refer to this link: https://www.dlsu.edu. ph/offices/accounting/official-payment-channels. 7.17 DLSU official receipts shall be available for viewing or downloading the following day from the date of payment after the bank collection report has been uploaded, unless there are discrepancies or exceptions noted. 7.18 Full Payment 95 7.18.1 Undergraduate students, including Frosh, transferees, and cross-enrollees, may pay their tuition and fees through installment. 7.18.2 Graduating students and upperclassmen with assessments of PHP

12,000.00 and below must pay in full. 7.18.3 Students in all year levels must pay their tuition and fees in full during summer classes. 7.19 Installment Basis 7.19.1 Students may pay their tuition and fees via installment. The payment options may be viewed through this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/ uploads/pdf/accounting/guidelines/payment-options- full-and-installment.pdf 7.19.2 An installment fee of PHP200 will be charged for a 2-payment scheme and PHP300 for a 3-payment scheme. 7.19.3 Students paying on installment basis who fail to pay the balance on the stipulated deadline will be allowed to complete the remainder of the term. However, such students will not be allowed to enroll for the next term and their transcript of records and transfer credentials, certifications, and other documents will be withheld until the balance is paid. In addition, a surcharge will be imposed upon payment of the balance. 7.20 Late Enrollment Fees 7.20.1 On the Initial Payment: There is a deadline for paying fees without a surcharge. A Late Enrollment Fee (LEF) is imposed if payment is made after the deadline: Start of classes PHP 200.00 Second Week PHP 300.00 Third Week PHP 400.00 Beyond third week PHP 400.00 + 100.00/working day of delay 7.20.2 Students with scholarships must submit to the Finance and Accounting Office the Certificate of Support (COS) 96 from OAS within the set deadline; otherwise, they will also be subjected to late enrollment fees. 7.21 On the Balance 7.21.1 Any payment of the balances beyond the deadline will incur a penalty. The surcharge to be imposed is as follows: Payment within the first week after the deadline: PHP 100.00 Payment within the second week after the deadline: PHP 200.00 Payment beyond two weeks after the deadline: PHP 300.00 but in no case shall it exceed PHP 500.00 7.21.2 Only the Cashier at the Finance and Accounting Office (FAO) is authorized by the University to receive payments. Payments made to unauthorized persons will not be honored. Section 8: ATTENDANCE 8.1 Prompt and regular attendance in all classes is encouraged for all students throughout the term. 8.2 Faculty members are expected to begin their classes promptly. However, unavoidable circumstances may cause them to be late for class. In such cases, the following guidelines are to be observed: For 60-minute classes, students should not leave until after 20 minutes. For 90- to 180-minute classes, students should wait for 30 minutes. A faculty member may consider their students absent if they leave their classes earlier than the prescribed time. 8.3 A student who is absent is held responsible for all assignments and for the entire content of the course missed, regardless of the reason for the absence. A student is encouraged to consult with the faculty member regarding their current academic status. 8.4 A student is considered absent from class if they are not present within the first third fraction of the scheduled class 97 time period. However, such grace period should not exceed thirty minutes. Thus, a student is considered absent if they arrive after: • 20 minutes

for a 60-minute class; or • 30 minutes for all classes exceeding 60 minutes (laboratory or lecture), including non-academic courses such as LASARE, NSTP, Lasallian Studies, and the SAS series for undergraduate students. 8.5 A student is considered late or tardy and receives a half- absence if they arrive in class during the first third fraction of the scheduled class time, i.e. if they arrive within the time schedule described above. A half-absence may be added to another half-absence to make a full absence recorded against a student. 8.6 Students render themselves ineligible for a passing grade in a given course for the term if they are absent from class for more than two and a half times the number of class meetings in a week, such as: • more than 12 1/2 times in a class meeting five times a week; • more than 10 times for a class meeting four times a week; • more than 7 1/2 times for a class meeting thrice a week; • more than 5 times for a class meeting twice a week; • more than 2 1/2 for a class meeting once a week. 8.6.1 For the summer term, students render themselves ineligible for a passing grade in a given course if they are absent for more than three (3) class meetings. 8.7 It is the student’s responsibility to keep a record of their absences, however they may verify such from the faculty member concerned. Once the allowable number of absences has been exceeded, the faculty member should verify this with the student concerned before the student is given a failing grade due to excess absences. The University has no obligation to inform parents about the number of absences their children have incurred. 8.8 Regulations regarding approved absences are as follows: 98 8.8.1 An approved absence is one authorized by the Dean of Student Affairs because a student has to attend an official function or activity. The Approved Absence Form shall be recommended for approval by the University official concerned. 8.8.2 Absences due to physical or mental health conditions of not more than two weeks are considered approved absences and should therefore not be counted against the student’s attendance if it is certified by a medical doctor or a licensed clinical psychologist using the professional’s official letterhead and validated by the Health Services Office Director (for physical conditions) and the LCIDWell Psychologist (for mental health conditions). In case of absences due to prolonged illness, a student or their duly authorized representative should notify as soon as possible their College Associate Dean who shall recommend the appropriate action to be taken. 8.8.2.1 In order for an absence to be approved, the student should present their original medical certificate to the Health Services Office (HSO) or certificate of mental health to the clinical psychologist under LCIDWell for validation. The validated medical/mental health certificate should be presented to their College Associate Dean within one (1) week after returning to the University. 8.8.3 Students with approved

absences should not be put to a disadvantage. The faculty member should give special make-up activities, other requirements, or special considerations, the manner and form determined by the faculty member following pertinent school guidelines. The schedule/deadline of such (e.g., special make-up activities, other requirements, or special consideration) shall be in consultation with the student concerned. Students should communicate the approved absences to the faculty concerned prior to the absence by sending the form via email or hard copy. 8.8.4 For absences due to special cases, the student must submit supporting documents to the faculty member who will decide if the absence is excused or not. There is no need to get an endorsement from the College Associate Dean. These special cases include: 99 8.8.4.1 Death of an immediate family member; 8.8.4.2 Emergencies; 8.8.4.3 Caregiving of sick family members; 8.8.4.4 Internet issues; 8.8.4.5 Sickness that does not usually require a medical certificate; 8.8.4.6 Delayed submission for course requirements; 8.8.4.7 Other special cases not mentioned above. 8.9 Only students who are enrolled for credit or audit are allowed to attend classes. Other students who wish to sit in should get prior permission from the faculty concerned. 8.10 Undergraduate students on the Dean’s Honors List of the preceding term are given the privilege of unlimited absences in academic courses during the current term. As such, these students should not be given a failing grade due to excess absences only. The Dean’s List Certificate is prepared by the Office of the University Registrar and may be claimed at the Office of the College Associate Dean. 8.11 The Dean of the College has the final authority to adjudicate all problems arising because of absences from regularly scheduled classes. 100 Section 9: EXAMINATIONS 9.1 A student who takes an examination should present their ID when required. 9.2 During examinations, a student may not leave the assigned place without the permission of the proctor-in-charge. 9.3 A student caught cheating, as defined in Sec. 5.3.1.1., shall be penalized with a grade of 0.0 in the requirement or in the course, at the discretion of the faculty member, without prejudice to an administrative sanction. In cases of alleged cheating, the faculty member should report the incident to the Student Discipline Formation Office. 9.4 A student who completes their examination should submit their paper only to the proctor. 9.5 Final examination schedules are posted on the DLSU website (http://calendar.dlsu.edu.ph/). A student with conflicting examination schedules should apply for a special final examination from the Office of the University Registrar. 9.6 If a student requests for a final special examination due to reasons other than conflict in examination schedule, they should accomplish a form issued by the Office of the University Registrar and pay the corresponding fee for each special final examination. Conflicts in final exam schedule should be resolved following the provisions in the Department Operations Manual: Conflict: Priority is given to: Regular Exam vs. Departmental Exam Departmental Exam Part-time Faculty vs. Full-time Faculty Part-time Faculty Full-time Faculty vs. Full-time

Faculty Seniority of Rank 9.7 A University policy of exempting students from final examinations is implemented under the following guidelines: 9.7.1 Faculty members are given the authority to exempt a student from final examination provided the student has a pre-final grade of at least 3.0 and provided further that such exemption is not contrary to departmental policies. This right of the faculty is made a policy of the University, but the faculty member is under no 101 obligation to grant any examination exemption. 9.7.2 At the beginning of the course, faculty members should convey to their students the policy on final examinations and should also stipulate the criteria for exemption. 9.7.3 The Gokongwei College of Engineering has adopted a policy of not allowing exemption in courses that will be covered in the professional board exams. 9.8 Students have the right to see their graded quizzes and exams preferably the latest one (1) week before the next succeeding examination and their indicative class standing before the final exams. 9.9 Students have the right to see their duly corrected final examination papers, the questionnaires, the answer key, and the computation of their final grades during the Grade Consultation Day. Section 10: CREDIT, GRADING AND RETENTION 10.1 In general, the credit for a course is determined by the number and length of class meetings in every week of a trimester. Thus, a class meeting of three hours a week for one trimester gives three hours of credit. Some undergraduate classes designated as laboratory may require two to three hours per week to equal one unit of credit for the term. The number of units is indicated on the course offerings, the Student Enrollment Record, the Enrollment Assessment Form, and other documents/materials related to the course. A full-time undergraduate student is one who is enrolled in courses with a total of at least 12 academic units in a term. Students may be enrolled in courses with a total of less than 12 academic units only if this is specified in their flowchart or if they are graduating. 10.2 For regular terms, the maximum academic load for undergraduate students is 15 units, or the number of units indicated on the program checklist. A student may enroll more than the maximum allowable load during a regular term under the following circumstances: 102 10.2.1 The additional units pertain to or the enrolled courses includes a PE course; and 10.2.2 The student is in their last term and the overload does not exceed 6 units. 10.3 Grading System The University adopts the numerical grading system. TABLE 10.3.1. GRADING SYSTEM Grade Point Description 4.0 Excellent 3.5 Superior 3.0 Very Good 2.5 Good 2.0 Satisfactory 1.5 Fair 1.0 Passed 0.0 Failed 9.9 Deferred (Only for thesis/practicum courses) 10.3.1 A grade of 9.9 is automatically changed to 0.0 after one term if the thesis or practicum is not completed or the faculty failed to apply for a Change of Grade. 10.4 The following grading system, with the approval of the Provost,

is also used for special courses or non-academic courses. 10.4.1 PASS: no grade point equivalence 10.4.2 FAIL: no grade point equivalence 10.5 Only grades in academic courses are included in the computation of either the term or cumulative GPA. Grades for non-academic courses, those with Pass or Fail grades, and courses with zero credit, are not included in the computation of the term or cumulative GPA. The term GPA refers to the weighted average of grades in all academic courses taken in a given term, whereas the cumulative GPA refers to the weighted average of grades in all academic courses from the first term in which the student was enrolled up to the term just finished. 10.6 Computing your GPA 103 The GPA may be obtained using this formula: • Multiply the credit for each course by the corresponding grade points merited in each course to get the honor points; • Add all the honor points to get the total; and • Divide the total honor points by the total number of credit units during the trimester. Indices are computed to four decimal places rounded off to three decimal places. 10.7 Grades for courses taken by a DLSU student cross-enrolled in another school will not be included in the computation of their GPA. These courses, together with the corresponding grades, will be reflected on the Transcript of Records as having been taken from another school. 10.8 Credit and Grading for Transferees and Students Taking Second Degrees The guidelines for credit and grading for transferees and students taking second degrees are as follows: 10.8.1 Courses taken in other schools by transferees may be credited, provided that the number of units to be credited does not exceed 20% of the total number of units required in the program at DLSU. 10.8.2 Only grades for courses taken at DLSU shall be included in the computation of the CGPA. 10.9 Any and all grades obtained in academic courses are included in the computation of the term and cumulative GPA for as long as such grades have been obtained at the University, regardless of the program under which they were obtained. 10.10 For subjects with lecture and laboratory courses, the following general policies apply: 10.10.1 The laboratory course is a co-requisite of the corresponding lecture course, both should be taken during the same term; 10.10.2 Separate grades are given for the lecture and laboratory courses unless specified otherwise by the department concerned; 104 10.10.3 If a student drops the lecture course, they must also drop the laboratory course. However, a student may drop the laboratory course without dropping the lecture course unless specified otherwise by the department concerned; 10.10.4 If the student fails in either the laboratory or lecture course, they should re-enroll only in the failed subject; and 10.10.5 The student has to pass both the lecture and laboratory courses to proceed to the succeeding course(s) unless specified otherwise by the college concerned. 10.11 Dropping from courses is covered by the following guidelines: 10.11.1

A student may drop a course up to the fourth week of the term. However, a student is not allowed to drop NSTP without the approval of the College Associate Dean. Frosh students should enroll in the Student Affairs Services (SAS) 1000 course during their first year. 10.11.2 The University follows the CHED-approved policies on refunds for dropped courses. Specific guidelines are published via Help Desk Announcement every term. 10.11.3 A dropped course will not appear on the records of the student for the term during which it was dropped. 10.11.4 To be considered as full-time, a student must still be enrolled in courses with a total of at least twelve (12) academic units after dropping courses. 10.11.5 A revised EAF reflecting the change on the list of courses enrolled may be printed by the student. 10.11.6 Students taking modular degree programs may refer to the memorandum on dropping of modular courses found in Appendix R. 10.12 Students who wish to petition for a change in a term grade should ask the faculty member(s) concerned to fill out the necessary forms and comply with the procedure for change of grade. Applications for change of grade should be given to the OUR within the deadline published on the academic calendar. After this deadline, no petition for change of grades shall be honored and the original one shall be retained unless 105 the student has filed a grievance against the faculty concerning their grades. 10.13 Students should ensure that the list of courses and sections indicated on their Student Enrollment Record and their student portal account is correct. They should also make sure to attend the correct courses and sections. Students who fail to drop are considered officially enrolled and are, therefore, covered by all the provisions applicable to enrolled students. 10.14 Audit courses are applied for not later than week 2 of the term and are subject to availability of slots and approval of the Department Chair and College Associate Dean of the student. Auditing students are those who want to sit in classes without any intention of having these courses credited. Their purpose is to increase their knowledge of the subject matter or acquaint themselves with classroom procedures. As such, auditing students: 10.14.1 May attend such classes only when they wish to; 10.14.2 May refuse to take the examinations in such classes; and 10.14.3 Cannot apply for course crediting. Enrollment forms and procedures for audit courses are available at the Office of the University Registrar. Special audit fees are payable at the Finance and Accounting Office. 10.15 Audit courses are not included in the computation of total number of unit-load for the term for purposes of computing the GPA and determining qualification for the Dean’s List and the University Honors List. 10.16 Within the first week of classes, audit courses may be converted to credit courses and as such are included in the computation of the GPA upon the recommendation of the Department Chair, in consultation with the College Associate

Dean and approval by the OUR, provided that the rules on maximum units enrolled are not violated. 10.17 Eligibility to continue academic studies in a degree program is covered by the following guidelines: 10.17.1 The following are ineligible to continue studies in the current degree program: 106 For students with ID number 102 and above who are under the Liberal Arts, Science, Business, Economics, and Education single degree programs who have accumulated 24 units of failure; under the Computer Studies programs who have accumulated 27 units of failure; and under the LIA-COM, Engineering, COM- COM and Education double degree programs who have accumulated 30 units of failure in academic courses at the end of any trimester. 10.17.2 Students who are ineligible to continue in their current program may apply to shift to another program. They must comply with the rules on shifting as stipulated in section 2.5, and follow the schedule as posted by the Office of the University Registrar. Students should file for a leave of absence if they cannot continue in the current program but are unable to shift on time. 10.17.3 Any failure incurred is automatically added to previous accumulated units of failure. Only students who have not reached the maximum allowable accumulated failures may re-enroll any failed course. If a student receives a grade of 2.5 or higher in the re-enrolled failed course, the original failure will not be counted in the accumulation of the number of units failed. However, all failures will still be counted for purposes of GPA computation and will be reflected on the transcript of records. 10.17.4 Enrollment of students who have become ineligible will be invalidated automatically. 10.17.5 Students who have accumulated the maximum number of units of failure set per program but have less than or equal to 30% of academic units remaining in their curriculum will be allowed to continue their studies at the University. 10.17.6 Laguna Campus students with ID 112 and below who obtain a CGPA of less than 1.000 at any given term after their third term in the University are not allowed to re- enroll. 10.18 Students who have exceeded the number of terms prescribed in their program flowchart will have to secure permission from their College Associate Dean to continue enrollment in the University. 107 10.19 All students are required to attend the NSTP General Orientation (as mandated by the revised NSTP IRR of 2009) offered during the first year. Students are required to complete the two (2) NSTP courses based on their flowchart. 10.20 Subject to the approval of the Department Chair, the College Associate Dean, a student may, upon request, be allowed to take special classes only under any of the conditions below. However, the University is not compelled to grant the request. 10.20.1 The student is graduating at the end of the term and the course to be taken as a special class is not offered for the term; 10.20.2 The student is graduating at the end of the term and

the schedules of the regular sections of the course to be taken as a special class conflict with other enrolled courses of the student; 10.20.3 The course to be taken as a special class is indicated in the program flowchart as a regular offering for the term but is not offered; 10.20.4 Other cases deemed meritorious by the Department Chair and the College Associate Dean. 10.21 Subject to the approval of the Department Chair and the College Associate Dean, a student may, upon request, be allowed to take a course equivalent should the course not be offered for the term and a faculty member is not available to teach the course as a special class. Section 11: TRIMESTRAL HONORS 11.1 The University Honors List and the Dean’s Honors List recognize superior scholastic achievement. To qualify for the Dean’s Honors List, students should: 11.1.1 Be enrolled in courses with a total of at least 12 academic units in a term. 11.1.2 Not have a grade below 2.0 in any academic course; 11.1.3 Not have a failure in any non-academic course; 108 11.1.4 Not have been found guilty of cheating or academic dishonesty and/or discipline offenses involving behavior unbecoming of a Lasallian such as commission of the act as defined in Section 5.3.1.15 (Section on Student Discipline) of this Handbook within the term; and 11.1.5 Have a GPA of at least 3.000 as indicated below: First Honors Term GPA is 3.400 or higher Second Honors Term GPA is between 3.000 to 3.399 11.2 To qualify for the University Honors List, students should: 11.2.1 Have completed at least six trimesters of study in the University; 11.2.2 Not ever have a grade below 2.0 in any academic course; 11.2.3 Not ever have a failure in any non-academic course; 11.2.4 Not ever have been found guilty of cheating or academic dishonesty and/or major discipline offenses involving behavior unbecoming of a Lasallian such as commission of the act as defined in Section 5.3.1.15 (Section on Student Discipline) of this Handbook within the term; and 11.2.5 Have a cumulative GPA and term GPA of at least 3.400 at the end of the trimester. 11.3 Students who qualify for the Dean’s First and Second Honors Lists are entitled to receive a Jose Rizal Certificate from the Dean’s Office. Those who qualify for the University Honors List shall receive a Jose Rizal Certificate from the Office of the Provost distributed through the Dean’s Office. Only those who are on the Dean’s First Honors List and/or the University Honors List for the entire academic year are recognized during the annual Academic Recognition Day held during the first term of the next academic year. Students who are included in the Dean’s First Honors List for the first six (6) consecutive terms shall be automatically admitted as candidate-members for the Jose Rizal Honor Society and shall be recognized during the annual Academic Recognition Day. 11.4 Students on the Dean’s First and Second Honors List or the 109 University Honors List in a

particular trimester are entitled to unlimited absences in academic courses for the succeeding trimester. Students who will be enrolling only in a practicum course in the succeeding term may avail of the privilege upon their return to the University provided they pass the course. 11.5 In case a student is enrolled in an academic course with a pass or fail grading system, the number of credit units of such a course will not be included in the total number of credit units in computing the trimestral GPA. Such number of units, however, shall be included in the computation of the total number of units for purposes of qualifying for trimestral honors. 11.6 Any request for interpretation or clarification of rules about honors and academic awards should be forwarded to the Chair of the University Honors and Awards Council. 11.7 Students on the Dean’s Honors List and the University Honors List are given advance enrollment privileges. Section 12: GRADUATION 12.1 Students may not participate in any activity related to their Graduation, including the filing of an application to graduate (ATG), graduation rites, and/or release of academic documents or records unless all administrative procedures relating to graduation are completed and disciplinary sanctions, if any are served. For clarity, students shall not be allowed to graduate, process requirements for graduation, participate in their graduation rites, or secure their diploma, transfer credentials, or certificate of completion from the time the OULC’s issues its recommendation for hearing of the complaint as a major discipline case and until the final resolution of the case, which includes the completion of the disciplinary sanction, if any. 12.2 Students who are on their last term of enrollment may qualify to graduate at the end of the term. As such, they should apply to graduate following the procedure and the schedule posted by the Office of the University Registrar. Students need not be absolutely certain of passing their remaining courses, other requirements, or both. 110 12.3 Upon graduation, undergraduate students who have remained on the Dean’s First Honors List and/or the University Honors List for all terms of enrollment in the University shall be admitted to full membership in the Jose Rizal Society and receive a special Jose Rizal Honors Award. The reckoning of the Jose Rizal Honors shall be at the start of the student’s enrollment in the University. The student should have graduated within the prescribed number of terms, excluding the terms on leave of absence or academic exchange without courses enrolled at the University. 12.4 Undergraduate students maintaining the required academic standards will be recommended for graduation honors of summa cum laude, magna cum laude, cum laude, and honorable mention. 12.4.1 To graduate with honors, 80% (75% for students in the Human Biology program) of the total credits earned toward the degree must have been earned in residence at the University. 12.4.2 The following cumulative GPA requirements apply to students graduating with honors: Honors GPA Summa Cum Laude 3.800 Magna Cum Laude 3.600 Cum Laude 3.400 Honorable

Mention 3.200 12.4.4 Students with a failing grade for any academic or non-academic course, and/or found guilty of cheating or academic dishonesty and/or discipline offenses involving behavior unbecoming of a Lasallian such as commission of the act as defined on Section 5.3.1.15 (Section on Student Discipline) of this Handbook are disqualified from graduating with honors. 12.5 Loyalty awards are given to students who have completed their schooling at the University, or at any school run by the De La Salle Brothers, from the first grade of their elementary studies. Students who officially stopped studying at the University or any school run by the De La Salle Brothers through the issuance of a Transfer Credential (Honorable Dismissal) are disqualified from receiving loyalty awards from the University. 111 12.6 The University Honors and Awards Council may give special awards to deserving graduating students. 12.7 Graduates of undergraduate degrees may also be awarded special honors for excellence in their major fields based on criteria determined by each academic department. Section 13: DISCONTINUANCE OF STUDIES 13.1 The following are means of discontinuing studies: 13.1.1 Issuance of a Certificate of Transfer Credentials (Honorable Dismissal) by the Office of the University Registrar as requested by the student if he/she is of legal age, or his/her legal guardian if the student is still a minor. 13.1.2 Expulsion is initiated by the University for the commission of a major offense(s) specified in this Handbook (see Section 5.3.1). Expulsion carries the warning to other educational institutions regarding the student’s record. 13.1.3 Academic ineligibility as specified in this Handbook (see Section 10 on Credit, Grading, and Retention). Students who have become ineligible need to request for the issuance of a Certificate of Transfer Credentials to transfer to another school. 13.2 Students who discontinue their studies in the University shall request a Certificate of Transfer Credentials from the Office of the University Registrar. They shall also secure clearances from concerned offices of the University. The Certificate of Transfer Credentials, once issued, is a permanent termination of studies and may not be cancelled. A second copy of this certificate shall not be issued at any time. 13.3 No records shall be released to any student who has unsettled accounts with theFinance and Accounting Office and/or pending accountabilities with other University offices. 13.4 Students who wish to secure a copy of their collegiate records should file an online request for documents through this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/offices/registrar/cost-of-studies/ request-for-documents/. 112 13.5 The Student ID is generally invalidated by the system two (2) weeks into the following term unless there is current enrollment on record. 13.6 For meritorious cases, a student may apply to drop from all courses or not enroll for a specific term(s) by filing a Leave of Absence (LOA) following the procedures prescribed by the Office of the University Registrar (OUR). The receipt of the Application for Leave of Absence form by the OUR shall be deemed official once approved by the OUR. No Application for LOA Form will be processed after the midterm

except for special cases endorsed by the College Associate Dean to the Office of the University Registrar. A student on a valid LOA who wishes to return to the University should inform the College Associate Dean at least a week before the start of classes about their intention to enroll the following term. 13.7 Any leave of absence, or extension of a leave, not formally approved by the College Associate Dean and the University Registrar shall be considered as absence without official leave (AWOL), in which case the University reserves the right to refuse re-admission to the student. 13.7.1 Returning students on AWOL should communicate with the Office of the University Registrar at least two (2) weeks before the start of classes to apply for readmission and enroll for the following term. Returning students on AWOL shall pay a returnee fee. 13.7.2 Students applying for LOA within two (2) weeks after the start of classes should be refunded a portion of the fees they paid in accordance with Section 7.6. 113 Section 14: FEES, SCHOLARSHIPS, AND PAYMENTS 14.1 All payments should be transacted directly with the (FAO) Finance and Accounting Office. Tuition and special fees are posted on the bulletin board of the Office of the University Registrar (OUR) and on the website prior to and during the enrollment period. 14.2 Mode of Paying Tuition and Fees 14.2.1 Cash, Personal Check, and Manager’s Check 14.2.2 Credit/Debit Card Payment (onsite) 14.2.2.1 Any Mastercard or VISA card through straight payment is acceptable as mode of payment for tuition and fees. Only one (1) swipe per card and up to a maximum of two (2) credit cards are allowed per student. 14.2.2.2 Payment through credit card may be made only to the Cashier at the FAO. 14.2.2.3 The credit card holder or owner is required to be present during payment to sign the credit card transaction slips. 14.2.3 Online through: 14.2.3.1 DLSU’s Online Payment Gateway (OPG) using VISA and Mastercard credit cards and debit cards 14.2.3.2 Dragonpay 14.2.4 Online through Mobile Phone/Internet Banking by account holders of the following banks: 14.2.4.1 BDO 14.2.4.2 BPI 3 Graduate 114 14.2.4.3 Metrobank 14.2.4.4 Unionbank 14.2.5 Over-the-counter (OTC) payment at any branch of BDO, Metrobank, Unionbank indicating the following details: 14.2.5.1 Name of Bank : Banco De Oro (BDO) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University – Manila Institution Code : 1125 14.2.5.2 Name of Bank : Metrobank (MBTC) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University, Inc. Institution Code : 921 14.2.5.3 Name of Bank : Unionbank (UBP) Biller’s Name : De La Salle University, Inc. For more details, please refer to this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/offices/accounting/official- payment-channels. 14.3 Payment Scheme with Sample Computation 14.3.1 Sample Computation (Non-scholars) 14.3.1.1 Two (2) Payment Scheme 115 14.3.1.2 Three (3) Payment Scheme 14.3.2 Sample Computation (Scholars): 14.3.2.1 Two (2) Payment Scheme 116 14.3.3 Students paying on installment basis who fail to pay the balance on the stipulated deadline shall be allowed to complete the remainder of the term. However, such students shall

not be allowed to enroll for the next trimester and their documents (Transcript of Records, Certifications, Transfer Credentials, etc.) shall be withheld until the balance is paid. 14.3.4 A student who paid on installment basis and, eventually, discontinues attending classes shall have to pay the balance of his/her tuition and fees. Note: • Graduate Students with a total assessment of Php 12,000 and below can avail installment payment scheme. • Late enrollment fee, installment, and surcharges are separate assessments. 14.4 A student who has not paid anything on the stipulated deadline shall be considered not enrolled. As such, this shall automatically result in the removal of the student’s name from the official enrollment list. Students removed from the official enrollment list shall also be charged an amount equal to 10% of their assessment, regardless of whether they actually attended 14.3.2.2 Three (3) Payment Scheme 117 classes or not. 14.5 Students who pay beyond the deadline, whether in full or by installment, are assessed late enrollment fees. 14.6 The responsibility of ensuring the check is good rests with the students. They should verify that their check has been honored by the bank and, in case it has been dishonored, should settle their account immediately by paying in cash. Failure to do so has the same effect as non-payment. As such, the student is automatically deleted from the official enrollment list. 14.7 A student who paid within the regular enrollment period and whose check was subsequently dishonored will incur a penalty. Additional charges will be imposed for delays in check replacement. 14.8 Claims for refund are made according to the Manual of Regulations for Private Higher Education of the Commission on Higher Education (2008). When students register in a school, it is understood that they are enrolling for the entire academic year for elementary and secondary courses, and for the entire semester for collegiate courses. Students who transfer or otherwise withdraw, in writing, within two (2) weeks after the beginning of classes and who have already paid the pertinent tuition and other school fees in full for any length longer than one month, will be charged a retention fee of 10 percent of the total amount due for the term if they withdraw within the first week of classes, or a 20 percent retention fee if within the second week of classes, regardless of whether or not they have actually attended classes. Students may be charged all the school fees in full if they withdraw any time after the second week of classes. 14.9 Students may apply for financial assistance and scholarships at Office of Admission and Scholarship (OAS). 14.10 Students under external scholarships are advised to coordinate with the Finance and Accounting Office regarding payment of their tuition and fees. 14.11 All enrolled students are covered by a personal accident insurance, 24 hours a day, on and off campus, for injuries caused by accident. For benefits and procedures for claiming, visit the 1911 Insurance Corp. at the Ground Floor of Br.

John Hall. 118 Section 15: ENROLLMENT 15.1 A full-time student is enrolled for a maximum of twelve (12) academic units during the term. A part-time student, on the other hand, may enroll for a maximum of nine (9) units during the trimester. Students may take an overload upon the approval of the College Associate Dean. 15.2 Standard Schedule of Classes Regular graduate classes have the following standard schedules: Week nights 6:00 PM to 9:15 PM (meeting once a week) 6:00 PM to 7:30 PM (meeting twice a week) Saturdays 7:30 AM to 10:45 AM 9:15 AM to 12:30 PM 12:45 PM to 4:00 PM 4:15 PM to 7:30 PM 15.3 Only courses to be counted towards earning the degree in the current program may be enrolled for credit. Students who wish to enroll in courses outside the curriculum for additional knowledge and the like must do so without credit (audit). 15.4 A student who cannot enroll in any regular/special class must enroll for residency via the student portal not later than week 2 of the term. The student on residency is considered a bona fide student for the term and may avail of University services (campus entry, library access, insurance, internet access, medical/dental services) and does not need to apply for re- admission upon return. However, a student who is not enrolled in residency or in any regular or special class needs to apply for returnee status before re- enrollment, subject to an assessment of a returnee fee. 15.5 A student is required to attend the SPS5000 which is the Institutional and College Orientation for New Graduate Students. If they fail to attend during their first term of enrollment, the student will be automatically charged of the orientation fee until he attends the Orientation. Failure to attend the orientation on their third term will automatically prohibit the student to take the subjects for the term. (The mandatory requirement to attend the Institutional Orientation is applicable to graduate students with ID#109 and above.) 119 15.6 A student with two “incomplete” (INC) grades at the time of enrollment will not be allowed to enroll. 15.7 Enrollment is done online through the student portal. Procedures for enrollment are announced by the Office of the University Registrar every term. 15.8 Academic Advising 15.8.1 Students should check the courses (and their respective course codes) offered for the following term. These are available through the student portal. 15.8.2 Students may discuss the courses they intend to enroll, including alternative courses, with the Graduate Program Coordinator of their academic department. 15.8.3 Only regular courses and residency may be enrolled online. Students must follow the procedures and schedule for non-coursework enrollment found in this site: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/uploads/pdf/ registrar/schedules/enroll_gs.pdf 15.9 Adjustment The University adopts an online adjustment system. For the procedures and schedule of online adjustment, students may refer to this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/uploads/pdf/registrar/ schedules/enroll_gs.pdf 15.10 Enrollment in regular courses will not be entertained once the term has started. Only non-coursework enrollment will be allowed after the start of class. For

procedures and schedules, students should refer to this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp- content/uploads/pdf/registrar/schedules/enroll_gs.pdf 15.11 Students should ensure that the list of courses and sections in their EAF is correct. They should also ensure that they are attending the correct courses and sections. Only students who are enrolled for credit or audit are allowed to attend classes. 15.12 Dropping/Withdrawal 15.12.1 A course may be dropped only up to the end of Week 2 of the term. Dropping of courses is done via the student portal. Officially-dropped courses will not appear in the 120 Transcript of Records. Refunds for dropped courses comply with the CHED-approved policies governing refunds, as follows: - 100 % refund for fully paid, or 0 retention fee for no payment or installment payment before the start of the term - 90% refund for fully paid, or 10% retention fee for no payment or installment payment until the end of Week 1 - 80% refund for fully paid, or 20% retention fee for no payment or installment payment until the end of Week 2 - 0% refund for fully paid or 100 % retention fee for no payment or installment payment within Week 3 to 4 15.12.2 After the dropping period, a student has to apply for withdrawal if they wish to discontinue attending a course. A “W” appears in the Transcript of Records. A student may withdraw from a course from Week 5 to Week 9 of the term. 15.12.3 Students who fail to drop are considered officially enrolled and are therefore covered by all the provisions applicable to enrolled students. 15.13 Students enrolled in audit courses are entitled to the following: 15.13.1 They may attend such classes only when they wish to; 15.13.2 They may refuse to take the examinations in such classes; and 15.13.3 They may convert audit classes to regular classes with credit up to the end of Week 2 of the term, upon the approval of the academic department and the University Registrar. 15.14 A student may cross-enroll in another school only after securing the written permission of the Associate Dean and the University Registrar. 121 Section 16: COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATIONS 16.1 As a general rule, passing the Written Comprehensive Examinations (WCE) is a pre-requisite to thesis or dissertation writing. Students are allowed to take the WCE after they have passed all coursework of their program, unless specified otherwise in their flowchart/checklist. 16.2 Generally, the WCE in the various programs are scheduled once each term, although some programs only schedule these annually. The WCE normally cover four (4) to five (5) areas of the major content and/or core subjects. 16.3 Students must follow the guidelines for enrollment in the WCE found on this site: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/ uploads/pdf/registrar/schedules/enroll_gs.pdf 16.4 The student is officially informed about the results of the WCE by the respective departments about three (3) weeks after the end of the last testing date. 16.5 Students who fail the WCE may apply for a re-test in the area(s) where they failed. Students who fail a second time

must audit the courses for which they did not pass the WCE. After auditing, they may take the WCE for the third time. A student who fails a third time in any of the areas of the WCE is rendered ineligible to continue in the program. 16.6 Some programs may require a separate Oral Comprehensive Examination (OCE). Students must follow the guidelines for enrollment in the OCE found on this site: https://www.dlsu.edu. ph/wp-content/uploads/pdf/registrar/schedules/enroll_gs.pdf Section 17: CREDIT, GRADING, AND RETENTION 17.1 Each program has a prescribed minimum number of academic units. The curriculum for the master’s degree usually has a minimum total of thirty–six (36) units. The total number of required units for the doctoral programs varies, with the minimum being thirty (30) units. 17.2 In general, credit for a course is determined by the number and length of class meetings per week per trimester. Thus, a class meeting for three hours a week for one trimester gives three hours of credit. Some classes designated as laboratory require two or three hours to equal one trimester hour of credit. 122 17.3 Prompt and regular attendance in all class sessions is required throughout the term. The following are the rules on student attendance. 17.3.1 Students render themselves ineligible for a passing grade in a given course for the trimester if they are absent from class for more than two and a half times the number of class meetings in a week, such as: more than 12-1/2 times in a class meeting five times a week; more than 10 times for a class meeting four times a week; more than 7-1/2 times for a class meeting thrice a week; more than five times for a class meeting twice a week; more than 2-1/2 for a class meeting once a week. 17.3.2 A student is considered late or tardy and receives a half absence if he or she arrives in class during the first third fraction of the scheduled class time but not to exceed thirty (30) minutes. A student is considered absent from class if he or she is not present within the first third fraction of the scheduled class time but not to exceed thirty minutes. Thus, a student is considered absent if he or she arrives after: 20 minutes, for a 60-minute class; 30 minutes, for a 90 to 180 minute class (laboratory or lecture) 17.4 Members of the faculty are expected to begin their classes promptly. However, unavoidable circumstances may cause them to be late for class. In such cases, the following guidelines are to be observed: 17.4.1 For a 60-minute class, students should not leave until after 20 minutes; for 90 to 180–minute classes, students should wait for 30 minutes. Students may be marked absent by a professor if they leave their classes earlier than the prescribed time. 17.5 The Dean of the college in which the student is enrolled has the final power to adjudicate all problems arising due to absences from regularly scheduled classes in the college.

17.5.1 Before the start of classes, all faculty members must determine the performance standards and the weight assigned to each standard in grading that course. The faculty must disclose to the students his or her grading 123 system (i.e. performance standards and respective weights assigned) at the beginning of the trimester. 17.6 The University adopts the grading system below for its graduate programs: 17.6.1 Diploma/Certificate Programs Grade Point Description 4.0 Excellent 3.5 Superior 3.0 Very Good 2.5 Good 2.0 Satisfactory 1.5 Fair 1.0 No credit 0.0 Failed 7.0 Passed (for Pass/Fail courses) 8.0 Failed (for Pass/Fail courses) 9.9 Incomplete/Deferred A Audit W Withdrawn For the diploma programs, courses for which grades below 1.5 were obtained should be repeated. A grade of INC becomes a “W” after (1) term if the student fails to complete the course. The highest completion grade that a student may receive is 3.5. 17.6.2 Masteral Programs Grade Point Description 4.0 Excellent 3.5 Superior 3.0 Very Good 2.5 Good 2.0 Satisfactory 1.5 No credit 1.0 No credit 0.0 Failed 124 7.0 Passed (for Pass/Fail courses) 8.0 Failed (for Pass/Fail courses) 9.9 Incomplete/Deferred A Audit W Withdrawn For the Master’s programs, courses for which grades below 2.0 were obtained should be repeated. A grade of INC becomes a “W” after one (1) term if the student fails to complete the course. The highest completion grade that a student may receive is 3.5. 17.6.3 Doctoral Programs Grade Point Description 4.0 Excellent 3.5 Superior 3.0 Very Good 2.5 Good 2.0 Satisfactory 1.5 Fair 1.0 No credit 0.0 Failed 7.0 Passed (for Pass/Fail courses) 8.0 Failed (for Pass/Fail courses) 9.9 Incomplete/Deferred A Audit W Withdrawn For the doctoral programs, courses for which grades below 2.5 were obtained should be repeated. A grade of INC becomes a “W” after one (1) term if the student fails to complete the course. The highest completion grade that a student may receive is 3.5. 125 17.6.4 The Trimestral Grade Point Average (TGPA) refers to the weighted average of grades in all academic courses taken in a given trimester, whereas the Cumulative GPA (CGPA) refers to the weighted average of grades in all academic courses from the first term in which the student was enrolled up to the trimester just finished. 17.7 Only grades in courses taken at De La Salle University shall be included in the computation of the cumulative GPA. Any and all grades obtained in academic courses are included in the computation of the trimester and cumulative GPA for as long as such grades have been obtained at DLSU, regardless of the program under which they were obtained and whether they were credited to the current program or not. 17.8 The GPA may obtain through the following procedure: 17.8.1 Multiply the credit for each course by the corresponding grade points merited in each course to get the honor points. Units corresponding to undergraduate pre-requisite/refresher courses, Pass/ Fail courses, and audit courses are not included in the computation. 17.8.2 Add all the honor points

to get the total; and 17.8.3 Divide the total honor points by the total number of credit units during the trimester. Indices are computed to four decimal places rounded off to three. 17.9 Credit and grading for transferees are governed by the following terms and conditions: 17.9.1 Evaluation of transfer of credits is subject to the approval of the College Associate Dean, upon the recommendation of the Chair/Graduate Coordinator of the academic department. 17.9.2 A maximum of one-third (1/3) of the total number of academic units (excluding thesis/dissertation) required for the degree at DLSU may be accepted as transfer credits. 17.9.3 Course taken from another school should be credited on the first term of studies at DLSU. No other courses taken from another school may be credited subsequent to this, unless covered by the issuance 126 of a cross-enrollment permit from the Office of the University Registrar (OUR). 17.9.4 Courses counted to earn a separate degree, whether at DLSU or in another school, are not eligible for crediting. 17.10 The final grades may be viewed online through the student portal. Faculty will be available for consultation during the Grade Consultation Day. 17.11 Students who wish to petition for a change in a term grade should ask the faculty member(s) concerned to fill out the necessary forms and comply with the procedure for change of grade. Applications for change of grade should be submitted to the OUR within the deadline published on the academic calendar. After this deadline, no petition for change of grades shall be honored and the original one shall be retained unless the student has filed a grievance against the faculty concerning their grades. 17.12 The following are the rules governing program residency: 17.12.1 Program residency refers to the maximum number of years a student has to complete the program. Program residency is reckoned from the date of admission to DLSU. 17.12.2 A student in the master’s program is given a maximum of eight (8) years to complete the program. A student in the doctoral program is given a maximum of ten (10) years to complete the program. 17.12.3 A student who goes beyond the maximum program residency, but has completed all course work and passed all comprehensive exams, may be allowed an extension of a maximum period of three (3) years and five (5) years for masters and doctoral programs, respectively. If all coursework and comprehensive exams have not been completed, no extension is allowed. 17.12.4 If a student has reached maximum program residency and was not allowed to extend, or the student was given an extension but still unable to finish, the student cannot continue in the program and will have to apply, through the Office of the Admissions and Scholarships, to a new and different program with no crediting of units earned. 127 17.12.5 The student is responsible for monitoring the status of his or her eligibility. No prior notice from DLSU is needed. 17.12.6 A student who has exceeded the maximum program residency (as

defined in Section 17.12.2) will have to secure permission from the Associate Dean to continue enrollment in the University. 17.13 Based on the results of the admission examination, a student may be required to take Advanced Technical Reading and Writing – ENG501M (3 units) and ENG502M (3 units) as pre- requisite courses to the program, subject to the following: 17.13.1 A student unable to meet the cut-off for the qualifying exam is required to enroll ENG501M (3 units) not later than the second term of enrollment and ENG502M (3 units) not later than the third term of enrollment. 17.13.2 The course ENG501M is a pre-requisite to ENG502M. As such these courses may not be taken simultaneously. Moreover, a student may enroll in ENG502M only after earning credit for ENG501M. 17.13.3 A student required to undergo Advanced Technical Reading and Writing may be allowed to proceed to other courses in the program only after earning credit for ENG501M and ENG502M. However, other courses may be enrolled simultaneously with ENG501M and ENG502M. 17.13.4 The courses ENG501M and ENG502M cannot be waived as a requirement for the completion of the program. 17.13.5 A student not required to undergo Advanced Technical Reading and Writing may opt to enroll the same for audit purposes. 17.13.6 A student who obtains a grade of 3.0 or higher in ENG501M need not enroll ENG502M. 17.14 A student who incurs two (2) grades of “0.0” is rendered ineligible for re-enrollment in the program. A student rendered ineligible in a program may shift to another program. 128 17.15 A student may shift to another program, subject to the following guidelines: 17.15.1 Shifting is transferring from one program to another in the same level. Thus, a student in a diploma/certificate program may not shift to a master’s program. In this case, the student needs to undergo the usual admission process for entry into the master’s program; 17.15.2 Students may shift a maximum of two (2) times for the duration of their stay at DLSU; 17.15.3 Students may apply to shift to the same program, in cases when both an old and a new curriculum exist. These cases do not count against the maximum number of allowable shifting; 17.15.4 Student must follow the shifting guidelines found in the OUR website: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/offices/ registrar/schedules/. 17.15.5 An application for shifting, if and when approved, is effective the succeeding term. Results of shifting application are released before the pre-enrollment period to allow students to enroll in courses under the new program. Section 18: THESIS AND DISSERTATION 18.1 Upon completion of all coursework and other requirements of the program, a student may enroll in thesis or dissertation writing. The thesis or dissertation or the equivalent research work entails an in-depth study and an extensive investigation of a problem. It must show originality and should contribute to the existing field of knowledge, preferably in conformity with institutional goals, thrusts, and objectives, and should manifest the student’s competence in research. 18.2 Enrollment in the graduate thesis or dissertation has

the following stages: 18.2.1 Thesis/Dissertation Writing 18.2.1.1 The thesis/dissertation writing course must be enrolled. Students should follow the 129 enrollment procedures and schedule found in this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp- content/uploads/pdf/registrar/schedules/ enroll_gs.pdf. 18.2.1.2 The thesis writing course for the master’s program has a total of six (6) units. The thesis course can be enrolled for a maximum of nine (9) terms. Students who go beyond the maximum shall be required to retake the thesis cycle, that is, start from Thesis Writing 1. 18.2.1.3 The assessment for the thesis writing course has three components: (1) Tuition; (2) Research Supervision; and (3) Miscellaneous, scheduled as follows: Thesis Writing Tuition Research Supervision Miscellaneous 1 * * 2 to 9 Enrolled with zero (0) unit * * 18.2.1.4 For the doctoral program, the dissertation writing course has a total of twelve (12) units. The dissertation writing course can be enrolled for a maximum of fifteen (15) terms. Students who go beyond the maximum shall be required to retake the dissertation cycle, that is, start from Dissertation Writing 1. 130 18.2.1.5 The assessment for dissertation writing course has three components: (1) Tuition; (2) Research Supervision; and (3) Miscellaneous, scheduled as follows: Thesis Writing Tuition Research Supervision Miscellaneous 1 * * 2 * * 3 to 15 Enrolled with zero (0) unit * * * Term here does not refer to the trimester of the Academic year, but the instance of enrollment of the student. 18.2.2 Proposal Defense 18.2.2.1 Only if and when the adviser has approved the defense of the thesis/dissertation should the student enroll for proposal defense. For enrollment procedures and schedules, students should refer to this link: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/ uploads/pdf/registrar/schedules/enroll_ gs.pdf. 18.2.2.2 To apply for proposal defense of thesis/ dissertation, the student must submit in quadruplicate the accomplished Application for Thesis/Dissertation Defense (Form No. E-22). This is available at the academic department, the Office of the Vice dean or at the Front Desk of the OUR. A copy may be downloaded from http:/www.dlsu.edu.ph/ offices/ registrar/pdf. 18.2.2.3 A student needs to be enrolled in the thesis/ dissertation writing course during the term to be allowed to apply for thesis/dissertation proposal defense. 18.2.2.4 Payment for thesis/dissertation defense may not be carried over to another trimester 131 even if no defense transpired, except when the department is unable to convene a panel for the current term. 18.2.2.5 If revisions in the thesis/dissertation are required by the proposal defense panel, the revised version should be submitted to the members of the proposal defense panel, through the adviser, not later than the end of three (3) terms from the term of defense. 18.2.2.6 A student unable to submit the revised thesis/dissertation within the allotted period shall be deemed to have failed the proposal defense. As such, the student needs to repeat the entire thesis/dissertation cycle. 18.2.3 Final Defense 18.2.3.1 Only students who have successfully completed the Proposal Defense are qualified to apply for the Final Defense. For enrollment procedures and schedules, students should refer to this link: https:// www.dlsu.edu.ph/wp-content/uploads/pdf/ registrar/schedules/enroll_gs.pdf. 18.2.3.2

A student may have the Proposal Defense and Final Defense within the same term, provided that the deadlines for application and submission of requirements are observed. 18.2.3.3 If revisions in the thesis/dissertation are required by the final defense panel, the revised version should be submitted to the members of the final defense panel, through the adviser, not later than the end of three (3) terms from the term of defense or six (6) terms for programs under the Colleges of Engineering, Science, and Computer Studies. 18.2.3.4 A student unable to submit the revised thesis/dissertation within the allotted period shall be deemed to have failed the final defense. As such, the student needs to repeat the entire thesis/dissertation cycle. 132 18.2.4 Submission of Requirements Upon successful completion of the Final Defense and upon revision (if necessary) of the thesis/dissertation, the student should submit all requirements for graduation indicated in these guidelines: https://www. dlsu.edu.ph/offices/registrar/academic-calendar/ graduation/ 18.3 The composition of the defense panel is determined after consultations among the Department Chair/Graduate Program Coordinator, faculty adviser and the student. The panel for the master’s level consists of a chair and two (2) members. For the doctoral level, the panel consists of a chair and four (4) members. 18.3.1 As far as practicable, faculty members from schools other than DLSU and experts in the field should be invited to sit in the panel. The panel chair, however, must come from DLSU. Each member of the panel must be provided with a copy of the thesis/ dissertation at least two (2) weeks before the defense date. 18.3.2 The same members, or at least a majority of the proposal defense panel, shall compose the final defense panel. 18.3.3 To officially convene the panel, at least two (2) of the three members at the master’s level and four of the five at the doctoral level, should be present provided the absentee member has submitted written comments. The mentor and the chair should be present at both proposal and final defenses. 18.4 To give recognition to outstanding research projects and upon the recommendation of the chair of the defense panel to the department, a student may be granted an award for outstanding thesis/dissertation, subject to the following criteria: 18.4.1 Significant contribution to the development or refinement of knowledge improvement of practice; 18.4.2 Originality and creativity; 133 18.4.3 Practicability in the discipline where it applies; the extent to which the study reflects and responds to practical problems; 18.4.4 Identification of a strong theoretical framework within which the problem is developed; and 18.4.5 Clarity and coherence of presentation and accuracy of language. Section 19: GRADUATION 19.1 Students who have successfully completed the required number of units and all the courses required in their curricula are eligible to apply for graduation. In applying to graduate, the student needs to submit the requirements in Section 19.3.4 of this Handbook and undergo other procedures set by the Office of the University Registrar (OUR), such as toga measurement for students attending the Commencement Exercises. The

OUR will post announcements regarding the procedures and deadlines for the application to graduate. 19.2 Students may not participate in any commencement activity unless all curricular requirements are completed and administrative sanctions (refer to Sec. 12.1), if any, are served. 19.3 Students in the diploma/certificate programs need to submit the Program Completion Form (Form No. S01A) at the end of their programs to receive their Transcript of Records and Certificate. 19.4 The official date of graduation or completion is the last day of the term when all the requirements of the program have been satisfied and submitted to the OUR. 134 Section 20: DISCONTINUANCE OF STUDIES 20.1 The following are ordinary means of discontinuing studies: 20.1.1 A certificate of Transfer Credential (Honorable Dismissal) issued by the University Registrar for reasonable cause on petition by the student, if he/she is of legal age, or on his/her behalf by a legal guardian, if the former is still a minor. 20.1.2 Expulsion, as initiated by the University for the commission of a major offense(s) specified on this Handbook. Expulsion carries the warning that other educational institutions should not accept the person expelled. 20.2 A certificate of Transfer Credential (Honorable Dismissal) should be requested from the Office of the University Registrar (OUR) when circumstances render such a step necessary. This certificate should be requested for as soon as a student decides to discontinue his or her studies at the University. 20.3 The Transcript of Records is a complete record of a student’s work in the University. It may be official (with school seal and signature of the University Registrar) or unofficial and may be requested at the OUR. 20.3.1 Transcript of Records intended to transfer credits of a student or graduate to another institution of learning is official and may not be hand-carried, but is sent directly from the OUR to the school to which the student or graduate wishes to transfer credits. Such Transcript of Records may only be sent by the OUR to another school if and when the student or graduate has filed for Transfer Credential and upon receipt of the request from the requesting school. 20.3.2 Transcript of Records intended for evaluation by a school for possible admission, whether for continuance of studies or for further studies, should be official. It shall be marked “For Evaluation Purposes Only” and may be hand-carried. 135 20.3.3 Transcript of Records intended for employment purposes whether complete (graduate) or not, should be official. It shall be marked “For Employment Purposes Only” and may be hand-carried. 20.3.4 Transcript of Records intended for other purposes, whether complete (graduate) or not, may be unofficial, without any markings, and may be hand-carried. 20.4 For meritorious cases, a student may apply to drop from all courses or not enroll for a specific term(s) by filing a Leave of Absence (LOA) following the procedures prescribed by the Office of the University Registrar. 136 Section 21: STUDENT ACTIVITIES The University recognizes the importance of developing creative and responsible student leaders who

will eventually assume the mantle of leadership on their chosen fields of endeavor. For this purpose, the University ensures the democratic and autonomous existence of the University Student Government (USG) and the Graduate Student Council (GSC) to encourage the formation of student groups that pursue clearly established common objectives and the initiation of student-directed endeavors set-up along social, cultural, religious, literary, educational, or recreational lines. 21.1 General Policies The University Student Government (USG) and the Graduate Student Council (GSC) as well as the establishment and operations of student organizations in the University are governed by the rules and regulations concerning student organizations and their activities within school campuses. Specific policies and processes on approval of activities can be found at the Student Activities Manual (SAM) for compliance of all University Student Government (USG), Graduate Student Council (GSC) units, recognized student organizations, and groups. 21.2 Authority to Operate Students desiring to establish, join and participate in student organizations on campus may do so as a right, subject only to reasonable regulations promulgated by the University through the Dean of Student Affairs (DSA), consistent with the Students’ Charter and other laws and regulations, in return for recognition by, affiliation with, and support from the DSA. It is also understood that organizations or publications of students that exist or operate outside the system of school recognition shall continue to be governed by law. 4 Student Activities 137 21.3 Forming a Student Organization 21.3.1 Role of the Aspiring Organizations Accreditation Committee (AOAC) The primary role of the AOAC is to facilitate the recognition of student-initiated aspiring organizations into the University system. It is likewise tasked to make policies affecting the recognition of aspiring organizations of the different Lasallian Mission (LM) offices. This does not include LM student volunteer groups. 21.3.2 The AOAC shall: 21.3.2.1 Screen the application of aspiring organizations under the LM offices; 21.3.2.2 Prepare aspiring organizations on the rudiments of operating a recognized student organization; 21.3.2.3 Facilitate the admission of successful aspirants to the different Lasallian Mission offices; 21.3.2.4 Recommend and make policies regarding aspiring organizations. 21.3.3 The AOAC shall be composed of the following: 21.3.3.1 For undergraduate student organizations, AOAC will be composed of: • Associate Dean of Student Affairs as Chair; • Director of the concerned LM office; • A representative from the respective Council of Leaders under the concerned LM office or the Council of Student Organization (CSO) Chairperson; • University Student Government (USG) Vice President for Internal Affairs • A representative from any LM Volunteer group (outside the concerned LM office) 138 21.3.3.2 For graduate student organizations: • Dean of Student Affairs or Director of Student LIFE; • College Associate Dean or Assistant Dean/ Graduate Studies Director • Graduate Student Council President or equivalent; and • Coordinator for Graduate Student Programs and Services of Student LIFE 21.3.4 General Policies of the AOAC 21.3.4.1 All aspiring organizations shall abide by the policies of the University. 21.3.4.2 All venue reservations of aspiring organizations during their trial period shall be under

the Council of Student Organizations or the respective Council of Leaders of the concerned LM office. 21.3.4.3 The official standard to be used in the accreditation of organizations for the following academic year is the one used by the CSO. 21.3.4.4 Any violation of the aspiring organization on the existing policies of the University will be counted against their application. 21.3.4.5 All decisions related to the accreditation process must have the concurrent approval of all members of the AOAC; 21.3.4.6 The provisions stipulated on the AOAC Manual of Operations shall be binding to all members of the AOAC. 21.3.4.7 The AOAC Manual of Operations shall be subject to review once every three years, synchronized with the student handbook revision year. Substantive changes made should be published in any University student publications at the beginning of its 139 implementation; 21.3.4.8 A disqualified aspiring organization, depending on the reason for disqualification, will not be allowed to apply again. 21.3.4.9 A disqualified aspiring organization may be allowed to reapply when disqualified due to the following: 21.3.4.9.1 A disqualified aspiring organization may be allowed to reapply when disqualified due to the following: 21.3.4.9.2 Incomplete documents 22.3.4.9.3 Failure to attend any of the scheduled presentations for accreditation 21.3.4.9.4 Executive Board officers with less than two (2) years of residency 21.3.4.9.5 Overlap of objectives with existing organizations 21.3.4.10 The number of aspiring organizations to be admitted per year under each Lasallian Mission Office shall not be more than five (5); 21.3.4.11 Acceptance and rejection of application shall depend on the policies stated in the AOAC Manual of Operations, and shall be made consistent to the Students’ Charter and the Student Handbook; 21.3.4.12 The decision to recognize the organization shall be based on a majority vote. 21.3.4.13 The aspiring organizations will receive an official mail from the AOAC not later than 2 weeks after the presentation. 21.3.4.14 Appeal of any nature should be submitted to the Dean of Student Affairs, within 30 days after the release of the results for resolution. 21.3.5 Specific Policies Regarding Applying Organizations 140 21.3.5.1 As a general policy, AOAC will only consider aspiring organizations that contribute to the University’s goal of establishing an integrated community of persons, learners, scholars, and citizens. Thus, any applicant- organization whose goals, objectives and/ or activities (proposed or implemented) seem to promote some form of regionalism, exclusivity, prejudice, or malice toward any sector of the University will be denied recognition. 21.3.5.2 Aspiring organizations whose membership qualifications or activities are rigid and unreasonable and demand the use of physical harm or violence will be denied recognition. 21.3.5.3 Because funds, facilities, and other resources in the University are limited, AOAC will not recognize an applicant organization: 21.3.5.3.1 Whose general nature, objectives and/or activities overlap with those of existing student organizations; and 21.3.5.3.2 That may be integrated into the functions of any existing student group or academic sector. 21.3.5.4 All accepted applicant-organizations will undergo a three-month or one- term observation/trial period to prepare themselves with the rudiments of operating a

recognized student organization and help AOAC verify its nature. After the trial period, any of the two (2) conditions will apply: 21.3.5.4.1 The organization is accepted under a three-term probationary status under the LM office concerned, or; 21.3.5.4.2 The organization’s application is denied. 141 21.3.5.5 The Executive Board of Officers of all applicant organizations must have at least two (2) years left from the time of application. 21.3.5.6 Any aspiring organization whose nature can be classified under any of the DLSU Offices will be referred to the Director of that Office. The decision to accept or grant the application will come from the Director of the office concerned; 21.3.5.7 An organization must get a grade point average of at least 80% in the accreditation to qualify for full accreditation. An AOAC accreditation rating sheet shall be provided for the reference of the different LM Offices. 21.3.6 Procedure on Forming a Student Organization 21.3.6.1 Application and Filing Any group of fifteen (15) students may apply to the AOAC to form a student organization. The application may be filed with the AOAC on the first trimester of the current academic year but not later than the 10th week of the first trimester. 21.3.6.2 Three copies of the following documents should be presented at the time the application is filed: 21.3.6.2.1 A formal letter of application addressed to the AOAC; 21.3.6.2.2 Constitution and By-laws; 21.3.6.2.3 List of interim board of officers, with their names, respective positions, majors, year levels, addresses, telephone numbers, birthdays, specimen signatures and ID numbers; 21.3.6.2.4 Names, year levels, majors, ID numbers and signatures of at least fifteen (15) founding 142 members, inclusive of officers; 21.3.6.2.5 A master plan of activities good for one academic year, which includes the goals, objectives, brief description and budget breakdown per activity; 21.3.6.2.6 A Table of Organization or Organizational Structure; 21.3.6.2.7 Budget Proposal for one year; 21.3.6.2.8 Certification from the Student Discipline Formation Office stating that the founders are bona fide students of DLSU together with the students’ existing discipline records; and photocopy of government- issued ID and EAF of members on the term of application as proof that members are bona fide students of DLSU. 21.3.6.2.9 Name of faculty adviser/s or adult formator/s with a list of credentials related to the aspiring organization and the adviser’s or adult formator/s’ letter of acceptance addressed to the Director of the concerned LM Office. 21.3.6.3 Other Requirements The constitution and by-laws as well as the proposed activities of the applicants should be in accordance with the institutional policies and other rules and directives of Student Affairs (SA), University Student Government (USG), Council of Student Organizations (CSO), or Graduate Student Council (GSC). It should not conflict or overlap with those of existing organizations. In addition, the officers and founding members should be of good moral character. 143 21.3.6.4 Approval of Application 21.3.6.4.1 The applicant should be informed of the approval of its application within two months from the start of the second term. No student organization shall

be allowed to function without the prior approval required. 21.3.6.4.2 If the membership of a probationary organization is less than 30 members, the AOAC shall deliberate on a case-to- case basis on the status of recognition of the organization. 21.4 Monitoring of Organizational Activities 21.4.1 It shall be the responsibility of Director of Student LIFE, in cooperation with and through the USG, CSO, and GSC, to supervise and regulate the operation and activities of all USG/GSC units and duly recognized student organizations. They should provide needed guidance for the maximum use of the organization’s human potentials and resources and efforts toward the attainment of goals and objectives of the organization as envisioned in their approved constitution and by-laws. All policies on supervision shall be based on official guidelines of the respective Student Affairs office. 21.5 Specific Policies Governing Student Organizations 21.5.1 On Constitution and By-Laws The USG, GSC and each recognized student organization should have a constitution and by-laws that conform to institutional requirements. 21.5.2 On Certificate of Proclamation and Recognition 21.5.2.1 For undergraduate organizations, the signatories of the certificate of recognition should include the following: DSA, Director of Student LIFE, USG VP-Internals, and CSO 144 Chairperson. For graduate organizations, the signatories are DSA, Director of Student LIFE, and GSC President. 21.5.2.1.1 Any University Student Government (USG) or Graduate Student Council (GSC) unit and/or recognized student organization that violates its statement of purpose or constitution or fails to comply with University policies should be investigated and decided upon by the Revocation Committee, composed of the DSA, Director of Student LIFE, USG VP-Internals or GSC President, and CSO Chairperson. 21.5.3 On Probation 21.5.3.1 All newly recognized student organizations shall be placed on a three-trimester probationary status. If necessary, the probationary period may be extended for another term for further evaluation. 21.5.3.2 All student organizations under probationary status shall abide by all the rules, regulations and requirements of the University. They are entitled to all rights and privileges of a duly recognized student organization. They should pass the entire probationary period to qualify for full accreditation or recognition. 21.5.4 On Accreditation 21.5.4.1 For undergraduate student organizations, an Accreditation Committee, composed of representatives from Student LIFE and the Executive Board of the CSO, shall announce an annual re-accreditation of all student organizations. The criteria on re-accreditation may be obtained from CSO. Any student organization that 145 fails the evaluation of the Accreditation Committee for two (2) consecutive years shall be automatically considered defunct. Recognized special groups/organizations shall also undergo an annual accreditation by an Accreditation Committee composed of representatives from the Student Affairs Office, Office of Student LIFE, and the Executive Board of USG or CSO. Specific guidelines and criteria can be found in the Student Activities Manual. 21.5.4.2 All recognized graduate student organizations shall be under re-accreditation to be granted formal accreditation for the current academic year. The organizations will be evaluated using the “Professional Graduate Student Organizations Accreditation Model.” 21.5.5 On Membership - All officially enrolled students shall be qualified for

membership in any student organization. 21.5.6 On Officership - Qualified students are encouraged to run for elected positions in the USG/GSC. Also, members of student organizations are encouraged to become officers of their respective organizations. The following guidelines are to be followed: 21.5.6.1 All bona fide students who fulfill the following requirements may file a certificate of candidacy for USG General Elections / GSC Elections. Members of student organizations who fulfill the following requirements are allowed to become officers: 21.5.6.1.1 For undergraduate organizations and USG, they should be full-time students carrying a minimum academic load of 12 units, with the exception of graduating students who may have fewer than 12 146 units left in their final term or as specified on their curriculum. 21.5.6.1.2 For graduate organizations and GSC, they should be enrolled in at least one academic course (including non-coursework requirements) to be eligible for the post. 21.5.6.1.3 They should not be under any major academic or disciplinary offense. 21.5.6.1.4 For undergraduate students, they should maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 1.750 or any other higher CGPA as may be stipulated in the organization’s constitution and bylaws. 21.5.6.1.5 For graduate students, they should maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 2.000 or any other higher CGPA as may be stipulated in the organization’s constitution and bylaws. 21.5.6.2 All officers of organizations are expected to serve the full three trimesters of their office. Students who cannot complete their service, except in meritorious cases as ruled upon by the LA for the USG, the CSO Executive Board for student organizations under CSO, or those cited in the GSC Constitution will not be allowed. 21.5.6.3 Any student may occupy an elected position (e.g., USG Executive Board member, College President, Legislative Assembly Representative, Batch Representative, CSO Executive Board member, member of the executive board of any of CSO organization, GSC Officer, GSO Executive Board Member) in only one organization. 147 21.5.6.4 The foregoing requirements shall be monitored, on a per-term basis, by the respective administrative offices by requiring USG/GSC units and student organizations to submit the names of elected and appointed officers for verification of records not later than two weeks from the start of each term. Concerned officers are deemed to have waived their right to confidentiality with regards to their CGPA and discipline records. Failure to maintain the requirements while serving as an officer in the USG/GSC unit and/or accredited student organization means that the student has to vacate his/ her designated post in the organization. 21.5.7 On Grievance 21.5.7.1 In case of conflict within an undergraduate organization, or between two or more organizations, and when no resolution to the issue at hand may be reached, the Executive Board (EB) of the CSO, the USG, or both may intervene and render a decision deemed appropriate after consultation with the Office of Student LIFE. 21.5.7.2 For conflict within a graduate organization, or between two or more organizations, and when no resolution to the issue at hand may

be reached, the Office of Student LIFE shall intervene. 21.5.8 On Overnight and Off-campus Activities Overnight and Off-campus activities of student organizations pertain to activities conducted and/or held out of the campus and/or overnight (in or outside the campus). A University authorized off-campus activity involving student organizations must have the approval or recommendation of the Office of Student LIFE or by the Associate Dean of the College if the activity is an academic requirement. 21.5.8.1 Undergraduate students participating in 148 any off-campus activities must submit a notarized consent form signed by their parent/ guardian before they will be allowed to participate in the activity. 21.5.8.2 Graduate students participating in any off- campus activities must submit a notarized graduate student consent form before they will be allowed to participate in the activity. 21.5.8.3 A faculty adviser or authorized faculty representative must be present in any off- campus activity. 21.5.8.4 Specific guidelines set by the University on overnight and off-campus activities must be observed by all student organizations. 21.5.9 Approval of Activities All co-curricular and extra-curricular activities sponsored by any duly recognized student organization shall be under the supervision of the Office of Student LIFE. The approval process of said activities shall be handled by this office. 21.5.10 On Activity Ban A ban on all student activities and publicity, except for tutorials, reviewer distributions, grievance booths, and meetings of officers, shall be enforced seven (7) calendar days before the start of the final examinations week until the last day of finals. Proposals submitted prior to the ban shall be accommodated. 21.5.11 On Term Break Activities Only organizational planning (e.g. teambuilding activities, meetings, distribution of newsletters, leadership seminars for organization officers) and development activities shall be allowed during the term breaks. 21.5.12 On Selling, Solicitations, and Sponsorships All student organizations and groups are to support DLSU’s policy on non-commercialization, 149 which discourages selling in campus and forging inappropriate partnerships with external companies and sponsors. Companies of ill-repute, and whose products promote non-Lasallian and negative values (e.g., cigarettes, contraceptives, liquor and gambling) will not be allowed as sponsors. The Office of Student LIFE has the option to reject a sponsor or donor on this ground. Selling is not allowed except for those provided in the Student Activities Manual. The University Guidelines on the Conduct of Bazaars on Campus shall govern all bazaars initiated by the student organizations or groups, including USG and GSC. 21.5.13 On Communication Protocols All communications such as invitations, requests, inquiries, and the like, sent by student organizations to offices inside the University, shall be noted by the director or the supervising office. External communications and those addressed to the members of the University administration (e.g. President, Chancellor, Vice Chancellors, Vice Presidents, Associate Vice Chancellors, Deans, Associate Deans) shall also be noted by the Dean of Student Affairs. 21.5.14 Guidelines for Specific Activities A specific guide on activities are found in the Student Activities Manual. All student organizations and groups are expected to have read, understood, and complied with the provisions

set therein. 21.5.14.1 Linkages A student organization may have tie- up activities with other organizations in and outside the university. Additional requirement for activity approval will include a draft Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) containing all the accountabilities of each of the parties involved in the activity. External agreements should be cleared by the Office of the University Legal Counsel. 150 21.5.14.2 Seminars/Talks/Fora Any duly recognized student organization may organize seminars/talks/fora that would contribute to the development of students in the academic and non-academic areas. If speakers and/or facilitators are from external public partners, the sponsoring organization should closely work with the Office of Student LIFE. Consultations must be done with administration on topics that may be detrimental to the University policies and principles through the signed endorsement from the department chair or college’s associate dean. 21.5.14.3 Contests/Competition Student organizations are encouraged to join and organize contests and competitions within the University or by outside entities or groups. For academic contests/ competitions, the organizers within campus or participants in off-campus contests must secure the endorsement of the chair of the department or the associate dean of the college. 21.5.14.4 Fund-Raising Activities The University acknowledges the need for student organizations to source their funds on top of the operating budget allocated for them. They are encouraged to organize fundraising activities that shall give favorable returns to the organization. The incidence of expense beyond the financial capacity of the organizations to pay is strictly discouraged. Specific guidelines of the University on fund raising activities must be observed by all organizations. 21.5.14.5 Purchases and Contracts All student organizations shall abide by the terms and requirements set by the Finance and Accounting Office on purchases, contracts, and payments. They shall also abide by the policies and procedures set by 151 the university on procurement of services and materials. 21.5.15 Documentation and Financial Reports All government/council units and student organizations must furnish the Office of Student LIFE copies of their respective organization’s term-end and year-end reports. A copy of the organization’s financial condition must be submitted to the Office of Student LIFE at the end of each term. 21.6 Faculty Adviser The University believes in the importance of assigning and supporting its student organizations in their co-and extracurricular endeavors. It strongly encourages other members of the academic community, specially its faculty members, to take an active role in the total development of these students by serving as advisers of student organizations. In doing so, they will be able to provide professional and moral guidance as well as facilitate the students’ personal growth and maturity. The interaction between the faculty advisers and the student leaders will also create an atmosphere of mutual respect and appreciation of each other’s role in the community. Each student organization shall have no more than three faculty advisers. The DSA appoints the faculty adviser, upon the recommendation of the Associate Dean from the list of faculty nominated by the concerned organization. The term of appointment of faculty members is for one academic

year and may be renewed. If the faculty adviser withdraws anytime his/ her terms expire, a new faculty adviser should be recommended by the organization to the DSA to serve the remaining term after which he/she may be re-appointed. The selection of a faculty adviser shall be based on the following qualifications: 21.6.1 He/she should be full-time/part-time faculty member of the University. Exceptions may be allowed on a case- to-case basis; 21.6.2 For professional organizations, he/she should be involved in the discipline related to the organization; 152 21.6.3 For non-professional organizations, the adviser should be knowledgeable in the particular field in which the organization is involved; and 21.6.4 His/her acceptance of the position of adviser should be done in writing by signing the letter of acceptance. The letter will be filed with the Office of Student LIFE. 21.6.5 Office of Student LIFE is the official adviser of the University Student Government (USG), Council of Student Organizations (CSO), Graduate Student Council’s Council of Presidents, and accredited Special Groups. 153 4 Appendices APPENDIX A GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILIPPINE LASALLIAN FAMILY These three documents, the Foundational Principles of Lasallian Formation, the Principles of Lasallian Education in the Philippines, and the Principles of Lasallian Social Development, are products of an ongoing effort to define and clarify the nature of the Lasallian presence and mission in the country today. They are the direct result of resolutions passed during the First Lasallian Family Convocation of 2003 calling for the strengthening of the sense of Lasallian identity and the deepening of the Lasallian charism among individuals and institutions in the Philippine District. Each of these statements builds on three values which are fundamental to Lasallian identity: the spirit of faith, zeal for service, and communion in mission. The intention of each of the three documents is to articulate the commitments that flow from these values in relation to the training and formation of Lasallian associates and partners, the conduct of the Lasallian educational mission in schools and the socio- political involvement of the Lasallian Family. The preamble of the Foundational Principles of Lasallian Formation articulates the core values of Lasallian identity. In this sense, it is the “heart” of the three documents. The values of faith, zeal for service, and communion, taken together as dimensions of one spirit, capture an important dynamism that goes back to the time of the Founder and his first associates. It is this same dynamism that has given rise to the countless apostolic initiatives and innovations that have since grown out of St. John Baptist de La Salle’s initial response to the call of God discerned in the needs of poor and abandoned youth. Taken as one spirit, the spirit of faith, zeal and communion provide a paradigm for living the Lasallian story today. These documents are intended to stimulate apostolic creativity, not to restrict it. The intention of the members of the three committees tasked with drawing up these documents was to provide a starting point for discernment regarding the

way the Lasallian charism and mission are to be incarnated in Philippine society today. They are intended to provide 154 principles and parameters rather than specific answers and solutions. It is the task of individuals and institutions using these documents to find ways in which to develop their own contextualized way of living out the Lasallian story in creative fidelity to the principles articulated herein. FOUNDATIONAL PRINCIPLES OF LASALLIAN FORMATION Preamble “As he became aware, by God’s grace, of the human and spiritual distress of the ‘children of the artisans and the poor,’ John Baptist de La Salle devoted himself to forming schoolmasters totally dedicated to teaching and to Christian education. He brought these teachers together in a community and subsequently founded with them the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools.” (R 1.1) In creative fidelity to our Founder’s inspiration, we, the Lasallian formators in the Philippines, commit ourselves to assuring the vitality and continuity of the Founder’s mission by providing a genuine Lasallian formation to all members of the Lasallian Family in the Philippines. Believing in a God of goodness and compassion who wills the integral liberation and salvation of all, we as Lasallian formators commit ourselves to educating and forming persons of faith and zeal who will make the saving compassion of God a living and effective reality in the lives of men and women today, especially those who are poor and vulnerable in society. We believe that the vocation of an authentic Lasallian is essentially a free and willing collaboration with God in the work of building truly human communities that reflect the values of God’s kingdom as expressed in the Gospel. Thus, the process of Lasallian formation is about enabling persons to acquire the vision, values, attitudes and practices that support collaboration with God’s creative and redemptive action in the world. In the Lasallian tradition, there are three constitutive elements that enable this participation. These elements, taken together as one dynamic unity, provide a way of integrating and expressing every Lasallian’s vocation. 155 The Spirit of Faith The spirit of faith flows from a relationship of communion with the Triune God who wills to save all people by drawing them into a lifegiving communion with him and with one another in the Lasallian tradition, the spirit of faith is a spirit that allows one to: • discover God’s active presence in his Word, in men and women, in the poor, in nature, in history, and in ourselves; • judge and evaluate things in the light of the gospel, • search for God’s will in order to carry out his saving plan, • unite one’s actions to the ongoing saving action of God I the world and • trust in God’s loving presence and providence when acting or discerning God’s will. Zeal for the Integral Salvation of All Zeal is the active expression of faith in gospel witness and service. It is oriented towards the integral salvation of persons, particularly the poor and the excluded.

Zeal is the enthusiastic and total gift of self for the sake of the mission expressed in such qualities as gratuity and generosity, creativity and fortitude, compassion and commitment. It involves a preferential concern for the poor and the vulnerable. The desire to be of greater service to others conditions the quest for excellence and continuous self-improvement. Communion in Mission, Mission as Communion Communion recalls the dynamic of association by which the first Brothers bonded together for the sake of the particular mission entrusted to them by God. Communion has four dimensions. As a relationship with God, it is the source of all mission and ministry; as a way of accomplishing mission, it suggests the solidarity and collaboration that comes from sharing in one vision, one spirit and one mission; as a way of relating to others, it suggests openness to all persons and the desire to be brother or sister to all especially those in need; as a goal of mission, it suggests the unity that comes through reconciliation between God, human beings, and creation. 156 PRINCIPLES OF LASALLIAN EDUCATION IN THE PHILIPPINES St. John Baptist de La Salle and his companions discerned God’s call to service in the human and spiritual distress of the poor and abandoned children. As a concrete response to this divine call, they associated together to conduct schools that would make the benefits of a quality human and Christian education accessible to the poor. By giving visible and effective expression to the creative and redemptive love of God for young people, such schools became “signs of God’s Kingdom and instruments of salvation.” Today, the mission of human and Christian education is a wide- ranging collaborative effort entrusted to men and women of diverse backgrounds and gifts, who, in creative fidelity to De La Salle’s vision, commit themselves to making the benefits of a transformative human and Christian education available to all, most especially to the poor. Each member of the Lasallian Family lives out this commitment through association in a Lasallian educational project according to his or her particular role and area of competence. By our efforts to ensure the vitality, relevance and effectiveness of the educational project, all who participate in and support such work act as partners in the educational process. As inheritors of De La Salle’s legacy and collaborators in the Lasallian Mission, we are convinced that: • Lasallian education is a mission and ministry at the service of God, the Church and society, and directed towards integral human and Christian development and liberation. • Lasallian education is imbued with a spirit of faith, which enables persons to interpret, judge and evaluate realities in the light of the Gospel, to unite one’s actions and intentions with God’s, and to rely on God’s providence in acting and discerning God’s will. • Lasallian education is marked by zeal: the wholehearted giving of oneself to the service of others, in gratuity and generosity, in creativity and fortitude, in compassion and commitment. • Lasallian education

is exercised as a communion in mission marked by a fraternal spirit which enables all sectors of the school community and all those who support its work to collaborate in educating towards a world that is more humane, more just and more fraternal, a world where no one is excluded from the banquet of life. 157 • Lasallian education forms disciples and citizens, prophets and professionals, who bring the transforming power of the Gospel to bear on culture and on every human endeavour in order to realize God’s kingdom of truth, justice, love, and peace. Guided by these principles, we believe that… Lasallian schools are educational communities where all sectors— • Participate in the Church’s mission and are committed to easing the plight of the vulnerable and marginalized sectors of Philippine society; are committed to assuring the integral human and Christian development of learners in all their uniqueness and diversity; • Are co-responsible for creating a culture and climate conducive to genuine learning and character formation; • Are stakeholders who work in association with one another in a strong spirit of fraternal solidarity; and • Are committed to continuous renewal and transformation in collaboration with others to accomplish their common mission. Lasallian learners are unique and gifted individuals who… • Strive to integrate Gospel perspectives and values in the conduct of their daily lives; are committed to excellence in order to be of greater service to God and country; • Take progressive responsibility for their own learning and development • Express concern and compassion for the plight of the vulnerable and marginalized sectors of society and respond to their needs; • And work together creatively, constructively, and enthusiastically to support the Lasallian Mission. Lasallian educators are service-oriented professionals who. . . • Are genuinely committed to the integral human and Christian development of diverse types of learners through personal witness and service; • Are attentive to learners in their uniqueness and seek to build appropriate relationships that promote total human formation; • Are committed to lifelong personal and professional improvement and service; 158 • Work together creatively, constructively and enthusiastically both to realize the Lasallian Mission and to assure the effectiveness and vitality of the institutions to which they belong; and • Serve as resources for the renewal of the Church and for the integral development of society. Lasallian educational experiences are dynamic processes that… • Challenge learners to realize their full potential by promoting critical and creative thinking, self-knowledge, and self-mastery; • Bring Christian perspectives and values to bear on human knowledge and culture; • Encourage synergy, collaboration and dialogue in an environment that is fraternal, hospitable, and laden with mutual respect; • Impel learners to translate their knowledge into actual practice for the betterment of society; and • Prepare learners for responsible participation in the world of work, the family, the community, the wider society, and the local Church. Guided by these principles and together in faith and zeal, we aspire to create educational works of quality that

will be “signs of God’s Kingdom and instruments of salvation” for the various individuals and groups who seek to realize the fullness of their dignity and humanity through education. PRINCIPLES OF LASALLIAN SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT Across the globe, in spite of the perceived bridging effect of advancements in information and communications technology, the multiple forms of exclusion and deprivation indicate the continuance of human suffering. The deprivation ranges from environmental degradation, material deficiencies as indicated by income poverty, gender discrimination, to the denial of fundamental freedoms or rights. Unless such prolonged social malaise is addressed, conflict within and between societies are expected to be aggravated. In the Philippines, the progress in addressing persistent social woes— from poverty, unemployment, and landlessness, among others, has been irregular. While the blame could be squarely put on the feeble nature of the state and the deficiencies of the concomitant political institutions, as well as the interrupted growth of the economy, the persistence of 159 these problems could also be attributed to the inability of the relevant social institutions to engender individuals who will constitute the social capital that will push for significant social change. Of these institutions, the schools must reflect on their roles and the transformative action they must take to help bring forth genuine social development, a society where everyone is liberated, and work towards the fullness of life. As Lasallian institutions we understand that genuine social development and the fullness of life for everyone in God’s plan requires our institutions to fulfill our educational mission and subsequently: BRING FORTH AWARENESS AND A DEEPER UNDERSTANDING OF SOCIAL REALITIES. Lasallian institutions must strive to develop among its members greater recognition of the realities of human suffering and the stewardship role that each share in preserving the integrity of God’s creation and creating a humane and just society. In developing such awareness, our institutions should recognize the following: • Awareness is the first level in a prolonged process of formation- conscientization that is integral to our educational mission. • Every individual needs to be constantly exposed to or immersed in the pressing social problems to which we subsequently aim to contribute a resolution. Such recursive and multi-sensory experience should enable the Lasallian to transcend his/her class in the same manner that our Founder, St. John Baptist de la Salle, gave up the comforts of the canonry in favor of providing educational services to the poor. • Heightened awareness of social realities subsequently aids the Lasallian in reading the signs of the times, discerning from this expansive assessment of social realities the various modes of life- affirming action that could be implemented to address prolonged social problems. EFFECT LIBERATING ACTION. Individually and collectively, Lasallians must act to eliminate forms of human suffering that contradict the God’s plan of fullness of life. Avenues and opportunities for self-propelled individual, collective and institutional life-affirming action to respond to varied social issues must be provided in every Lasallian institution. In carrying out all forms of social development interventions, Lasallian individuals

and institutions must be guided by the following: • The action to be undertaken must be context-sensitive so that it could be purposeful and sustainable, necessary attributes of social interventions owing to the depth/magnitude of the social problems to which we hope to contribute resolutions. The contexts for social 160 development intervention cover two dimensions –institutional and societal. As regards the first, the actions to be undertaken must be aligned to the core mission/purpose of their institution while the second requires that all actions are appropriate to the social milieu where such intervention will be effected. A thorough appreciation of the context would allow for a nuanced selection among the various forms of liberating action “from providing support services [resources and skills sharing] to community and institutional partners, advocating policies to address social and ecological issues, to capacity-building engagements”. • Actions must always be life-affirming. The goal of social development interventions is to preserve and bring forth the fullness of life. Liberating action is mutually empowering, enabling the individuals and institutions engaged in such action to increasingly realize their own worth as individuals and as a collective, deriving joy and fulfilment from the faith-strengthening experience of inducing social change. • Liberating action should be capacitating and not a mere transfer of the endowments of a Lasallian individual or institution to less privileged and impoverished groups. The latter simply reproduces the conditions that perpetuate dependence, helplessness, indifference, benevolence and structural inequality. BE IN SOLIDARITY WITH PROGRESSIVE ELEMENTS OF THE LARGER COMMUNITY TO BRING FORTH A SOCIETY THAT IS IN KEEPING WITH GOD’S PLAN. As a member of a community, of the nation, and of the global village, Lasallian institutions must work in solidarity with peoples and institutions that share the conviction in denouncing and working towards the elimination of unjust practices and social structures that deal death on the suffering majorities, promoting the participation of the underrepresented and implementing other life-giving interventions. The institutions and peoples that our institutions could partner with locate themselves in communities, at the regional and national levels, in the Asia-Pacific region, and across the world. Lasallian institutions, individually and as a Philippine Family, have the capacities to effectively work in partnership with larger organizations, be they Church-based, multisectoral, or a network of civil society organizations. At the District level, the District Justice and Peace Commission (DJPC) shall be the chief vehicle in forging partnerships with national and international organizations that share the same conviction for social change and emancipation in keeping with God’s plan. 161 LASALLIAN ASSOCIATIONS, ASSOCIATES, & OTHER RELATIONSHIPS Whereas, the Lasallian Family is growing worldwide, and the levels of involvement and relationships of its members have evolved over the years in an altogether unique way; Whereas, the Philippine Lasallian Family recognizes individuals and groups that have a long history of collaboration and have answered the call to deepen their commitment to the Lasallian Mission as manifested by their lives, which are marked by distinctive Lasallian characteristics; Whereas, the Philippine Lasallian Family sees the

need to create a Task Force that will set in place definitive criteria and process in classifying and recognizing Lasallian Associations, Associates and Other Relationships with the end in view of providing them with options to deepen their commitment to the “Shared Mission;” Let it be resolved that the Brother Visitor create that Task Force within School Year 2003-2004 considering sectoral and geographic representations to generate District-wide participation utilizing various approaches and strategies. The Chair of the Lasallian Partners Council shall convene the Task Force. Let it be further resolved that the Task Force shall submit within one year its final output to the District Council and Lasallian Partners Council. In turn, the District Council and Lasallian Partners Council shall forward their recommendations to the Brother Visitor for final approval. Dissemination and adoption of the approved criteria and process immediately follow. Let it be further resolved that the District provide necessary resources to carry out this mandate. Basic Premise The main basis for the definitions provided below is the varying levels of commitment to the Lasallian Mission. Section I: Individuals A. Members of the Philippine Lasallian Family This is the entire universe of Lasallians: Brothers, Sisters, students, parents, alumni, teachers, support staff and benefactors who have been or are currently connected to La Salle by virtue of their employment, enrollment or participation in a Lasallian ministry, 162 and who explicitly or implicitly consider themselves members of the Lasallian Family. B. Lasallian Partners [These are Lasallians] who in fact share [the Lasallian Mission] in its multiple educational, catechetical, apostolic and professional aspects, and make it possible for the mission to be accomplished. They collaborate with conviction for the time they are [connected with La Salle]. [cf. The Documents of the 43rd General Chapter, p. 4] These are members of the Lasallian Family who are currently and actively engaged in a Lasallian ministry, and endeavor to be personal witnesses through their ethical and moral lives, to live integrated lives worthy of their vocations, and to be committed to their chosen faiths, vocations and professions. Since the main criterion is active engagement in a Lasallian ministry, some students, parents and alumni may also be considered Lasallian Partners if their involvement goes beyond being beneficiaries of Lasallian education. When these people volunteer to be involved in the delivery of the Lasallian Mission to others, they are de facto Lasallian Partners. C. Lasallian Associates [These] are Partners who have had a long record of collaborating in the Lasallian Mission, and who feel a call to deepen the charism, spirituality and Lasallian communion in which they wish to participate. In particular, their lives are already marked by a number of distinctively Lasallian characteristics: • A vocation inspired by the charism of Saint John Baptist de La Salle and his values; • A life of faith which discovers God in everyday life understood in the light of Scripture and, for persons of other religions, in the light of their own sacred texts; • A community experience of

some form or other suited to the identity of its members; 163 • A mission of some duration which associates persons with the educational service of the poor; • An openness of mind which makes it possible to see beyond the individual and his immediate environment. [cf. The Documents of the 43rd General Chapter, p. 4] For some persons who are involved in the mission, sharing tasks and responsibilities is a truly personal response to an interior call which they feel, and which motivates them to accept formation, to share, and to listen to Lasallian appeals for commitment to the service of young people in difficulty. By mutual agreement, they may eventually be associated with a community of Brothers or a District, depending on their type of commitment. Perhaps they are already part of a process which will lead them, later on, to join an intentional group, if they so desire. In certain cases, these persons, if they so wish, and at their request, may express a desire to be associated in a more formal way with the Institute. It is for the Brother Visitor and his Council to recognize these persons as Associates. [The Documents of the 43rd General Chapter, p. 5] Becoming an Associate is not an award or recognition given by the District. It is first and foremost a free choice of the Partner to deepen his/her commitment to the Mission and to express this commitment in a more formal way. The District merely accepts the commitment and commissions the Partner as an Associate. Because of this deepening commitment, the commissioned Associate can expect, as St. La Salle says, to receive two kinds of rewards: (1) “an abundance of grace”; and (2) “a more extended ministry and a greater ability to procure the conversion of souls.” [Meditation 207.1] The reward for such commitment and good work is, simply put, more work, more responsibility, and the ability to do the work. The goal of the District is not to create an elite class of Associates. Rather, the goal is to promote the vocation of the Associate so that there will be more Partners willing to commit themselves to the Lasallian Mission 164 in a deeper way. Building up a critical mass of such Associates is necessary to further the Lasallian Mission in the Philippines. The following are expected of Associates: 1. An Associate must constantly endeavor to grow in Lasallian spirituality by his/her involvement in Lasallian formation, be it personal or for other Partners. 2. An Associate must be actively involved in the advocacy of particular causes relevant to the advancement of the Lasallian Mission. 3. An Associate must continue to strive to live up to the criteria by which he/she was commissioned as an Associate. Section II: Groups A. Lasallian Groups This is the entire universe of Lasallian organizations, groups and communities: religious congregations, student organizations, parents’ associations, alumni associations, faculty and staff associations, labor unions, etc. These are all groups that have been formed because of

some connection with a Lasallian institution or ministry. B. Lasallian Partner Groups We call groups ‘intentional’ when their members, in response to an interior call, come together voluntarily to practice some aspects of Lasallian life, each group choosing particular type of life and the length of their members’ commitment. For this to be considered an intentional Lasallian group, there are three necessary conditions: • That some aspect of Lasallian practice is clearly visible; • That there is a clear commitment to young people and the poor; 165 • That the Visitor and his Council have authenticated it in an official document for a prescribed time. In the medium term, we think that it is possible that a number of other intentional groups will be founded. In fact, these groups already exist, although they may have no juridical structure. They exist because their members have developed links and relationships, and have adopted projects, and have done so with explicit reference to the Lasallian charism which they share. If they so wish, they could envisage becoming intentional groups. Such a request could come from a whole variety of groups. These could include, among others: Lasallian teams, teams of educators and teachers, joining forces temporarily to respond to specific needs encountered by young people in difficulty, Christian Lasallian communities, volunteers, Lasallian Youth, young people doing missionary work, former pupils, parents of students. We should note that in the composition of these groups, one can meet Brothers, other Christians, members of other religions, and persons of good will whose point of reference, as the 42nd General Chapter indicates, is the “human and spiritual values recognized, pursued by and lived by all Lasallians – meditation, service of the poor, the family, human rights, the rights of children…” (Circular 435, p. 43) [The Documents of the 43rd General Chapter, p. 5-6] Lasallian Partner Groups are Lasallian Groups that are currently and actively engaged in a Lasallian ministry. Since the main criterion is active engagement, some student organizations, parents and alumni associations may also be considered Lasallian Partner Groups if their involvement is in the delivery of the Lasallian Mission to others. 166 C. Lasallian Associations Consequently, we recognize as being associated with the Lasallian Mission all intentional groups and all persons who respond to an interior call by an educational commitment which has Lasallian characteristics, and which has been authenticated by a competent authority. Together, these persons and groups are associated with the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools, in order to respond, in a complementary manner, to the demands of the Lasallian Mission. The charism inspiring this mission was given to Saint John Baptist de La Salle, and was authenticated by the Church, for the service of young people. [The Documents of the 43rd General Chapter, p. 6] A Lasallian Association is a Lasallian Partner Group that has asked to be formally associated with the Lasallian Mission. Becoming a Lasallian Association is not an award or recognition given by the District. It is

first and foremost a free choice of the Lasallian Partner Group members to deepen their commitment to the Mission and to express this commitment in a more formal way. The District merely accepts the commitment. The following are expected of Lasallian Associations: 1. The group must have some structures for formation and renewal. 2. The group must be aligned with the directions of the Lasallian Mission set by the De La Salle Brothers and the Philippine Lasallian Family as expressed in the resolutions of the General Chapter, the District Chapter and the Philippine Lasallian Family Convocation. In behalf of the Philippine Lasallian Family, we salute the following committed Brothers and Lay Partners who shared their time and talents to draw up the 3 documents as mandated by the Convocation of 2003. From the booklet, Guiding Principles of the Philippine Lasallian Family Published by The Philippine Lasallian Family, 2005. 167 LASALLIAN SCHOOLS IN THE PHILIPPINES De La Salle University (1911) Malate, Manila and Laguna Campus De La Salle Andres Soriano Memorial College (1965) Toledo City, Cebu La Salle University-Ozamiz (1929) Ozamiz City, Misamis Occidental De La Salle-Santiago Zobel School (1978) Muntinlupa City, Metro Manila De La Salle Araneta University (1946) Malabon City, Metro Manila La Salle College Antipolo (1985) Antipolo City, Rizal University of St. La Salle (1952) Bacolod City, Negros Occidental De La Salle University-Dasmariñas (1987) Dasmariñas, Cavite La Salle Academy (1958) Iligan City, Lanao del Norte De La Salle Medical Health Sciences Institute (1987) Dasmariñas, Cavite La Salle Green Hills (1959) Mandaluyong City, Metro Manila De La Salle - College of Saint Benilde (1988) Malate, Manila St. Joseph School-La Salle (1960) Bacolod City, Negros Occidental St. Jaime Hilario School - De La Salle Bataan (2006) Bagac, Bataan De La Salle Lipa (1962) Lipa City, Batangas De La Salle John Bosco College (1963) Bislig City, Surigao Del Sur 168 APPENDIX B SOUTH MANILA EDUCATIONAL CONSORTIUM (SMEC) The South Manila Educational Consortium (SMEC) formerly South Manila Inter-Institutional Consortium (SMI-IC) was established in 1974 to be an instrument for the maximization of institutional resources through the sharing and cooperation of universities and colleges in the South Manila area. It is the oldest academic consortium in the Philippines. Originally, the member schools are: DLSU, PCU, SSC and SPM. Now, the consortium is composed of twelve member schools, as follows: Adamson University (AdU) University of the Philippines -Manila (UP-M) De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde (DLS-CSB) Philippine Christian University (PCU) De La Salle University (DLSU) Philippine Normal University (PNU) Emilio Aguinaldo College (EAC) Sta. Isabel College (SIC) Philippine Women’s University (PWU) St. Scholastica’s College (SSC) Lyceum of the Philippines University (LPU) St. Paul University Manila (SPUM) For more than thirty years, SMEC has provided a support network to ensure quality, humanist, and holistic education to its member schools. The committees formed by representatives from SMEC member schools focused on common issues and concerns ranging from administrative, academic, students, and service-related projects. Projects and activities organized by the committees strengthened and complemented existing school programs.

More than a hundred projects were completed in the areas of faculty and staff enhancement, instructional materials development, technology updating and training, physical resources improvement and library collection expansion. Camaraderie and community spirit have also been fostered, strengthening the spirit of oneness and belonging. SMEC envisions a nation transformed through education. Its mission is to organize a group of higher education institutions actively collaborating to effect social transformation by promoting the cause of education. This is to be achieved by making quality and relevant learning accessible to as many as possible. SMEC aims not just to prepare graduates to be professionally competent but also to inculcate 169 in them humanist and holistic values centered and rooted in Christ. SMEC has five service areas that implement projects. Extension Services promotes civic responsibility through critical engagement and participation in the community and society Student Affairs Committee promotes excellence and quality education through better student services. Curriculum and Instruction continuously share information, training and resources to improve curriculum and instruction of member schools. Faculty and Administrative Staff Development ensure excellence especially in faculty academic preparation, competency, and effectiveness. Research and Publications monitors and supervises the conduct of SMEC research projects as well as textbook preparation and publication. Collaboration leads to synergy among member schools to effectively initiate social change. Developing the strengths of each member and respect for each other’s differences is the core in enhancing the spirit of complementarity and camaraderie. 170 APPENDIX C STUDENT SERVICES AND PROGRAMS OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT FOR LASALLIAN MISSION UNITS Center for Social Concern and Action (COSCA) The Center for Social Concern and Action (COSCA) is the social development arm of De La Salle University. We are the primary unit responsible in mobilizing the university to serve Church and Society, especially the poor and marginalized. We accomplish this by facilitating the integration of social engagement in the teaching, learning, research and community life of the university. The office further strengthens these efforts via reciprocal, strategic and sustainable partnerships guided by Lasallian Principles and the teachings of the Church. We currently have a pool of sixty (60) community partners composed of People’s Organizations (POs), Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), and other Civil Society Organizations (CSO) you may engage with. These organizations are located in the National Capital Region, Batangas and Nueva Ecija. They represent various sectors including fisherfolk, farmers, children, persons with disabilities (PWD), persons deprived of liberty (PDLs), urban poor communities, local government units and faith-based organizations. Services Offered Service-Learning Orientation for Students We collaborate with your professors to provide students with the needed information and assistance to ensure that service-learning projects align with course outcomes, community needs, off-campus policies and Lasallian values. Social Engagement Guidance for Student Organizations We provide social engagement orientation and consultation for student organizations. We guide groups in the development, implementation and evaluation of their desired social engagement initiatives. 171 Placement in Formal and Informal Volunteering Opportunities We offer seasonal opportunities to volunteer in any of our community projects and activities. We

also invite interested students to to join the two student volunteer organizations we supervise, namely: COSCA Lasallian Outreach Volunteer Effort (COSCA L.O.V.E. Volunteers) De La Salle - Red Cross Youth (DLS - RCY). Identification of Potential Partners for Social Engagement We can also help you find a suitable community partner that may benefit from your group’s skills, talents, strengths and resources. It would always be best though to get to know the partner better before finalizing any plans. Opportunities for Community Exposure / Immersion We also offer weeklong community immersion activities during summer through our EHEMPLO Community Immersion Program. Shorter exposure visits to our partners may also be offered or arranged for your group. Advocacy and Mobilization Activities To enable students to critically reflect and act on pressing social issues, we organize regular Kapihan ng Malalayang Lasalyano (KAMALAYAN) sessions in-campus or online. We also unite with other social development networks and political organizations for mobilization and policy advocacy activities to apply what we learn from KAMALAYAN. Lasallian Pastoral Office (LSPO) The Lasallian Pastoral Office (LSPO) leads the members of the DLSU community towards faith-life integration and in becoming authentic disciples and prophetic citizens through worship and liturgical celebrations, spiritual formation, community building activities, and research on spirituality and faith development. LSPO is known and distinguished: 1) by the retreats and recollections it gives to the students (LASARE, SHARE, and FORMLAW), faculty, staff and personnel of the university that help deepen their spirituality and facilitate in building faith communities in the university; 172 2) by the meaningful liturgical celebrations that nurture the faith and deepen prayer life of the community; and 3) by becoming a resource for the Church as it promotes priestly and religious vocations and in conducting research in faith development. LSPO maintains various groups of ministers that assist in the liturgical celebrations of the community. It is also supported by the Student Lasallian Animators, the volunteer youth ministers in the campus. These groups of ministers and volunteers receive special formation program and training in order to be of better service to the community, to the Church and society. The office supervises the Catholic Religious Organizations of Students (CROSs) and other religious organizations and communities in the campus. LSPO also conducts interfaith prayer services with other Christian communities; Iftar Dinner during Ramadan for Muslim faculty, staff, and students; and liturgical celebrations during the Chinese New Year. Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well-being (LCIDWell) The Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well-being (LCIDWell) was established to respond to the requirements of Republic Act No. 11313 or the Safe Spaces Act and Republic Act No. 11036 or the Mental Health Act. Grounded on the Lasallian principles of inclusivity and respect for all persons to ensure a learning and working environment that values the well-being, diversity, and dignity of persons in the community, the overall goal of LCIDWell is to ensure the implementation of programs and integration of policies on inclusion, diversity, and well-being in DLSU’s manuals and operations. LCIDWell has

three areas of focus: (i) Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces; (ii) Accommodation and Inclusion for Diverse Populations; and (iii) Mental Health and Well-being. LCIDWell also serves as the secretariat for the Council on Inclusion, Diversity and Well- being (CIDW). As the secretariat for the Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI), LCIDWell receives and processes cases of sexual harassment and provides adequate support to the CODI. The center will oversees the mental health programs for the DLSU community, and provides mental health services for DLSU employees. 173 Lasallian Social Enterprise for Economic Development (LSEED) The Lasallian Social Enterprise for Economic Development (LSEED) Center is the flagship initiative of De La Salle University in areas of social entrepreneurship and social innovation. It localizes the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals by working with students and communities in creating social enterprises. In 2019, LSEED Center was awarded first runner up for Academic Leadership in Social Innovation in Asia-Pacific. Vision LSEED Center envisions itself to be an internationally recognized center for social entrepreneurship that promotes innovation, inclusion, and collaboration with emphasis on community-student partnerships and sustainable development. Mission LSEED Center is committed to form social entrepreneurs and innovators who are driven to contribute to community development and help localize the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals through social entrepreneurship. Programs • LSEED Fellowship Program • Social Enterprise Development for Student Organizations Program • Curricular & Co Curricular Program • LSEED Internship & Volunteering Program • LSEED Certificate Program • Advocacy & Internationalization Program • Social Innovation of Entrepreneurship Research Program Lasallian Social Entrepreneurship Social Entrepreneurship is a multi-sectoral, multidisciplinary, and innovative approach to development that aims to address community social problems by utilizing concrete and inclusive business models that are anchored on the principles of sustainable development. 174 Key Elements Inclusive Ownership Structure-inclusion of community members in the ownership structure of social enterprises as co-owners and not just mere beneficiaries, laborers, or suppliers. Quality Participation-equitable participation of community members, students, and other stakeholders from the planning up to the business operation stage of the social enterprise. Equitable Valuation-proper valuation of non-monetary contributions of all stakeholders of the community Lasallian Mission Office-Laguna (LMO) The Lasallian Mission Office (LMO) works towards synergizing its efforts to realize the University’s vision-mission of bridging faith and scholarship in the service of society, especially the poor and marginalized. Our mandate is to provide opportunities for the Laguna campus community to live out and promote our Lasallian core values of Faith, Zeal for Service, and Communion in Mission as expressed in the University Vision-Mission statement. Ultimately, the goal of our faith formation, social engagement, and community building programs is to allow each Lasallian to discover how they can contribute towards meaningful social transformation. The Lasallian Mission Office (LMO) is responsible for the formulation of holistic and spiritual formation programs that respond to the needs of students, administrators, faculty, and co-academic personnel of the Lasallian community. It is also structured to complement the academic potentials of the students by promoting integrity and creating synergy

in its programs and activities. Ministries under LMO A. Formation and Campus Ministry The Formation and Campus Ministry contributes to the realization of DLSU’s vision by providing opportunities for faith and spiritual development and by creating venues where the life and charism of St. John Baptist de La Salle are promoted in order to continuously inspire the members of the academic community to be achievers for God and Country. It provides the members of the Lasallian Community with opportunities for spiritual nourishment and growth through the various liturgical and para-liturgical celebrations. It ensures active participation of the community in the Mass by training and forming a pool of Liturgical Ministers such as Liturgical Choirs, Lectors and Commentators, Ministers 175 of the Special Eucharist and Altar Servers. It takes charge of retreats and recollections for students and other sectors of the community. The programs on adult formation hopes to effect genuine Lasallian formation to the adult members of the Lasallian community through communal accompaniment and opportunities for volunteerism and involvement. It aims to help the members of the Lasallian community to deepen their understanding of what it means to be a Lasallian and to better appreciate their rich heritage. B. Social Engagement Ministry Moved by our faith, this ministry provides Social Engagement Programs and activities that are designed where individuals and groups within the campus come together to advance the public good, address systemic challenges, or to influence the direction of a community. It organizes and supervises activities that contribute to the development of social involvement and creates and maintains a support system for community engagement particularly the poor areas surrounding the institution by fostering the spirit of service and of volunteerism among the members of the institution. Likewise, this acts as the overall in charge of the LINGAP Program and other social engagement activities. Office of Student Affairs (OSA) The Office of Student Affairs (OSA) envisions itself as a leading learner- centered student affairs and development resource committed to the holistic formation of Lasallians integrating faith-life, leadership, and community engagement towards social transformation. Inspired by the Lasallian Core Values of Faith, Zeal for Service, and Communion in Mission, the units under Student Affairs commits to accompany students by: • Providing holistic Lasallian formation programs that integrates faith- life, community engagement and servant leadership; • Providing resource and consultancy services in career development, counseling, student discipline formation, spiritual formation, sports development, cultural arts, student media, leadership formation, and community development; • Developing evidence-based student formation interventions and services; • Engaging in meaningful collaborative partnerships with different sectors internal and external to the University to integrate student development programs and services; 176 • Empowering student affairs personnel to become faith-driven and service-oriented formators; and • Nurturing a learner-centered environment through efficient and quality student services and up-to-date facilities. The following are the constituent offices under OSA: Culture and Arts Office (CAO) The Culture and Arts Office (CAO) dedicates itself in the promotion of a well-balanced, non-formal culture and arts education to the

Lasallian community. The office provides after-school artistic training to qualified students in dance, music, theatre and event management, backed by a Quality Assurance component to continuously raise the standards of cultural promotion in the University. It manages seven performing groups, namely: DLSU Chorale, Lasallian Youth Orchestra, De La Salle Innersoul, La Salle Dance Company-Contemporary, La Salle Dance Company-Folk, La Salle Dance Company-Street, and DLSU Harlequin Theatre Guild. The groups are supported by the DLSU Green Media Group, which acts as the events and production management arm of the office. The skills of aspiring artists in these fields are refined through relevant workshops, master classes, productions,and participation in festivals and competitions. Through the “Art in Action” programs, the office supplements the learning experience provided by the academic departments in teaching culture and arts-related subjects through providing interactive approaches in the curriculum through shows and craft demonstrations. CAO also aids in the promotion of culture and arts to underprivileged communities through teaching artistic skills and producing shows for them. Part of the office’s creative services are providing performances, artistic direction, and audio-visual production during the activities of various offices, departments, and organizations inside and outside the University. Likewise, it also serves as the university’s information hub on culture and arts events that the students can expose themselves to further their experience and knowledge of the subject. NSTP and Formation Office (NFO) The NSTP and Formation Office implements the student development and formation programs integrated into the undergraduate curriculum. It emphasizes the significance of Lasallian formation to be present on all the mass-based and government-mandated programs offered to the students in the University. NFO envisions to be at the forefront of 177 curriculum-based student formation programs integrating student learning experiences towards the fulfillment of one’s Lasallian identity in nation-building. Core Functions: (1) Supervises the design, implementation, formulation, and adoption of the National Service Training Program (NSTP) Components; (2) Ensures the integration of the Lasallian formation in the different NSTP components; (3) Develop and implement curriculum-integrated Lasallian formation programs given to students; and (4) Provide meaningful and formative activities to students in coordination with the different units under the Office of Student Affairs. Office of Counseling and Career Services (OCCS) The Office of Counseling and Career Services (OCCS) is a service unit that provides resource and consultancy services in counseling and career development, develops research-based counseling and career development programs, and engages itself in meaningful and collaborative partnership with various stakeholders of the University. The office, through its team of professional counselors and career services providers, delivers preventive and responsive programs and services which are designed to complement the academic and formation programs of the university and contribute to the holistic formation of the students. OCCS values cultivating happiness among Lasallians. Thus, OCCS is committed to providing students a SAFE SPACE AND CONFIDENTIAL ENVIRONMENT (physically and virtually) for them to be heard and freely discuss their academic, career, personal, and mental health concerns. Through these programs and services, OCCS provides support and accompanies students

as they transition to university life. OCCS is composed of a team of licensed professional counselors who value and support student wellbeing and facilitate the acquisition of life skills for personal growth, employability, and productive living. 178 Office of Sports Development (OSD) The Office of Sports Development (OSD) is the unit tasked with the formulation, design, and implementation of university sports programs, projects, policies, and procedures. It is also responsible in ensuring the university’s responsiveness to the needs of the changing academic and non-academic conditions in the field of sports by providing formative programs to its student-athletes. Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) The Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) promotes student discipline formation and character development. It anchors on its framework of prevention, promotion, and formation in order to facilitate transformation in the students by employing the following: (1) Behavioral management and intervention programs for students with discipline- related concerns; and (2) Preventive approaches through policy education, advocacy, and trainings. SDFO programs include formative interventions, discipline formations, student volunteers/support staff, student discipline awards and recognitions, policy awareness, case conferences and proceedings, and student discipline monitoring. The office also provides services such as pre-hearing consultations, discipline clearances, discipline-related assistance, lost and found services, lending of calculators, discipline publications and media, and the SDFO clear-up drive. The SDFO Paragons program, its student support staff, is designed to recruit students with capabilities, potential, and interest to assist in the planning, implementation and evaluation of SDFO’s programs and services. SDFO also trains the members of the Student Representatives Pool (SRP) program who represent the student body in all formal hearings, summary proceedings and case conferences of the SDFB and UPCC. In addition to its direct line, 536-0269, and three (3) local lines, 611 (DES), 290 (LFCS) and 414 (DEAPS), the Lasallian community may report any discipline-related incident or concern via the following communication channels: Student Media Office (SMO) The Student Media Office (SMO) oversees the operations of the major student media groups of De La Salle University. SMO offers students the opportunity to hone their skills in print publications, TV and radio broadcast, online media, marketing, art, 179 photography, and graphic design. It ensures the smooth flow in the operations of the major student media groups, namely Ang Pahayagang Plaridel, Archers Network, Green & White, Green Giant FM, Malate Literary Folio, and The LaSallian. It prepares the members of the University’s major student media groups for ethical, disciplined, journalistic, literary, and creative work. It also helps the student media members achieve the autonomy envisioned by the Campus Journalism Act of 1991. Office of Student Leadership, Involvement, Formation, and Empowerment (SLIFE) The Office of Student Leadership, Involvement, Formation, and Empowerment (Student L.I.F.E.) seeks to develop and implement programs that promote self-sustaining development and positive influence towards effective personal and organizational leadership. It takes charge of ensuring smooth and well-balanced implementation of co-curricular and extra-curricular activities of the different student groups under the University Student Government (USG), the Council of Student Organizations (CSO), Graduate Student Council (GSC),

Graduate student organizations, and other special groups. It also encourages student involvement and helps orient frosh and graduate school learners on University life. OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT FOR LAGUNA CAMPUS College Student Affairs - Laguna (CSA) Attuned to a vibrant DLSU Laguna Campus community, the College Student Affairs executes the programs and services of the Student Leadership Involvement, Formation and Empowerment (SLIFE), NSTP and Formation Office (NFO), Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) and collaborate with other Student Affairs constituent offices in providing opportunities for student involvement, volunteerism, leadership, and behavior management through various student development programs. 180 OTHER STUDENT SERVICES THE LIBRARIES The Libraries at DLSU goes beyond being a traditional library. It is designed as a welcoming and vibrant “third space” – a place apart from home and work – fostering a learning and a sense of community. It encourages students, faculty, and researchers to learn together as scholars and as human beings. The Libraries provides a vast array of information resources and services to support the University’s instructional, curricular, research, and extension programs. It strives to provide an enriching and stimulating learning environment through organized, relevant, and efficient information services and innovative facilities. The Libraries currently has five satellite libraries on three DLSU campuses, which cater to all faculty, students, researchers, and alumni: • The Learning Commons – Manila Campus The “main” library of DLSU, housed at the Henry Sy, Sr. Hall, occupies eight and a half floors (5F to 14F) to accommodate its growing population and collection. • Law Library - Rufino Campus Located at the 7th floor Houses the law collection and its allied disciplines, including multiple sets of the Supreme Court Reports Annotated (SCRA) in both print and digital formats • College Library - Laguna Campus Located at the 3rd floor, West Wing, Milagros Del Rosario Building Houses books, theses, journals, and magazines on various disciplines • Integrated School Library - Laguna Campus Houses books, non-print materials, and student research papers on varied subject areas that support the higher grades students. • Preschool Library - Laguna Campus Houses books, manipulative toys, board games, and other non-print materials that support the early grades students. 181 Collections The Libraries offers a vast collection of digital resources that are accessible via its website to support academic endeavors. This includes: • Nearly 500,000 volumes of print books • Almost 200,000 titles of eBooks • Over 5,000 titles of individual journals 245 online databases • More than 34,000 volumes of theses and dissertations (available in print, CDs, and electronic formats). Spaces The Libraries offers a variety of zones for specific purposes. These include: • Discussion Rooms: Ideal for collaborative group work and discussions. Reservation for their use may be done here. • Quiet Study Areas: Dedicated spaces for focused individual study, such as the Faculty Corner, Graduate Corner, and Quiet Room. • Chill at the 5th: A dedicated space for relaxation and recreation. • 6F Exhibit Area: Hosts live performances and interactive exhibits fostering engagement. • Makerspace: A hub

for individuals with shared interests in technology-based creation and tinkering. • Group Viewing Rooms: Equipped for multimedia presentations and group viewing sessions. • Audio-Visual Room: Accommodates larger presentations and screenings. • Meeting and Conference Rooms: Suitable for small conferences, seminars, and workshops. 182 Schedule of service hours Monday to Friday Saturday The Learning Commons (Manila Campus) 7:00AM – 8:00PM (7F - 14F) 7:00AM – 9:00PM (6F) 7:00AM – 8:00PM (7F - 14F) 7:00AM – 9:00PM (6F) Law Library (Rufino Campus, BGC) 8:00AM – 10:00PM (Reading Area) 8:00AM – 12:00MN (Student Center) 8:00AM – 8:00PM (Reading Area) 8:00AM – 12:00MN (Student Center) College Library (Laguna Campus) 7:00AM – 7:00PM 8:00AM-12:00PM Information Commons (Laguna Campus) 8:00AM – 5:00PM Closed Schedule of service hours Monday to Friday Saturday The Learning Commons (Manila Campus) 8:00AM – 5:00PM 8:00AM – 12:00PM Law Library (Rufino Campus, BGC) 8:00AM – 5:00PM 8:00AM – 12:00PM College Library (Laguna Campus) 8:00AM – 5:00PM 8:00AM – 12:00PM Information Commons (Laguna Campus) 8:00AM – 5:00PM Closed Library Service Hours During regular term During term break 183 Connect with us Health Services The Health Services Office (HSO) aims to ensure the well-being of students and employees of the University by providing basic medical care, performing physical examination, prescribing appropriate medical and dental treatment and referring clients to different disciplines by competent medical and paramedical personnel. The HSO offers the following services: • Attendance to emergency calls • Routine medical and dental examination and prescription of medication • Periodic medical and dental examination • Medicine dispensation • Provision of medical team to students’ activities done outside the campus • Issuance of first aid kit • Referral to specialist • Conduction of patients with emergency hospital needs to nearby hospitals • Validation of medical certificate • Issuance of medical certificate for university purposes • Health education through individual counseling and wide information dissemination • Pre-employment examination of employees • Other services related to the preceding services 184 Clinic Locations and Operating Hours Taft Campus Makati Extension Campus Laguna Campus Main Clinic Ground Floor, Br. Connon Hall Room 518, 5th Floor, RCBC Building, Ayala Ave., Makati City East Wing, Lower Ground Floor, Milagros del Rosario Building Satellite Clinic Ground Floor, Enrique Razon Sports Complex LC1 Clinic Ground Floor Learning Community 1 LC2 Clinic Room 308, 3rd floor, Learning Community 2 Clinic Hours Monday to Saturday 6:00 am to 10:00 pm Monday to Friday 1:30 pm to 9:00 pm Saturday 7:30 am to 3:30 pm Monday to Saturday 7:00 am to 6:30 pm Dining Services The University’s food concessionaires make fresh and healthy meals, light snacks and refreshments available to the academic community from Monday to Saturday. The Manila campus has canteens located at St. La Salle Hall, the Br. Andrew Gonzalez Hall, and the Enrique Razon Sports Complex. The Laguna Campus has one canteen at the Milagros del Rosario Building. These concessionaires also provide catering services for school functions and social gatherings. 185 Bloemen Hall, located along St. Joseph Walk, provides the community an access

to a wide variety of grab-and-go meals and desserts. It also houses student-run businesses under the ANIMO BIZ (Business Innovation Zone) program, the Bloemen Art Gallery and the Green Giant DJ booths, easily making the area one of the hippest hang out places in the Manila campus. A coffee shop operated by the Coffee Bean and Tea Leaf Co. at the 6th Floor of Henry Sy, Sr. Hall caters to the patrons of the library. Auxiliary Services The University has a full roster of service providers to make the academic life of students as convenient and conducive to learning as possible. These include a Bookstore, located at the ground floor of Yunchengco Hall, where textbooks and basic school supplies may be purchased and a Copy Center, located at LS125, to meet the various printing needs of the members of the community. A digital hub operated by Power Mac Center serves the technology needs of the community. The DLSU Store and Concierge are also located at the Ground Floor of Yuchengco Hall. Transportation Services The school manages a transportation system to support the various logistical needs of the academic community. The primary service is carried out through Arrows Express which operates 5 round trip routes whose schedules are set and announced at the start of every term. Chartered trips are also arranged for other school activities such as sports events, student plays, immersion activities and team building exercises, as requested by host offices or organizations. Security Services The University maintains 24/7 security in all campuses through organic personnel and an accredited security agency. Services rendered include emergency response and incident investigations. Members of the community are also assisted when addressing concerns that require further police coordination and action. 186 Scholarships The following are the scholarship grants managed by the Office of of Admissions and Scholarships (OAS): • Animal Biology Scholarships • Archer Achievers • Athletic Scholarship • Br. Andrew Gonzalez Academic Scholarship • Brother President Scholarship Program • CAO-DLSU Chorale • CAO-Harlequin Theatre Guild • CAO-De La Salle Inner Soul • CAO-La Salle Dance Company Jazz • CAO-La Salle Dance Company Street • CAO-La Salle Dance Company-Contemporary • CAO-La Salle Dance Company-Folk • CAO-Lasallian Youth Orchestra • PWD Graduate • PWD Undergraduate • Centennial Scholarship Program (CSP) • Children of Retired Faculty/ASF/APSP • Debate Society Scholarship • Family Tuition Privilege • Free Elective Fund • Gokongwei Grants • Last Mile Scholarship • Lingap Scholarship Program • Military Scholarships • OAS-Scholarship for Children of CAP • ROTC Tuition Grant • Scholarship for Children of Co-Academic Personnel - SCC • Scholarship for Children of Faculty • Scholarship for Children of STC Pioneer • St. La Salle Institute of Graduate Studies • St. Mutien Marie-Student Aid (Graduate) • Star Scholarship • Student Aid (College) - St La Salle Scholarship Grant • Student Aid (Graduate) - St La Salle Scholarship Grant • Vaugirard Scholarship Program (VSP) Note: This list does not include externally funded scholarship (EFS) grants. For inquiries on EFS, please email scholarships@dlsu.edu.ph 187

APPENDIX D EXPECTED LASALLIAN GRADUATE ATTRIBUTES (ELGAs) The Expected Lasallian Graduate Attributes (ELGAs) focus on the knowledge, skills and attributes that graduates should acquire and demonstrate in their course of studies and internships as evidence of accomplishing the school’s vision-mission. These ELGAs also reflect the graduate’s capacity for lifelong learning and transfer of knowledge in the workplace. Expected Lasallian Graduate Attributes (ELGAs) Desired Learning Results That Demonstrate Higher Order Thinking Skills Lasallians who: Culturally Sensitive Critical and Creative Thinkers • Are interculturally fluent and have a global mindset, open to deep dialogue with others from different cultural backgrounds, whether in physical or digital spaces. • understand and respect traditional ways and indigenous values, appreciating them as part of the diversity that enriches one’s life. • acknowledge, practice and promote cultural elements that contribute to one’s identity • critically examine information to bring to light assumptions and evidences behind them before accepting and/or acting on them. • are able to look at things from different perspectives and can appreciate points of view different from theirs. • generate ideas, designs, systems or information with resourcefulness, imagination, insight, originality, aesthetic judgment, enterprise, and a risk-taking approach to meet current and emerging needs of society. • reflect on and derive new insights from existing information and express them in different ways, including creative and artful forms. 188 Effective Communicator • communicate effectively and confidently in a range of contexts and for many different audiences and communication platforms such as social media, using inclusive or non- discriminatory language at all times. • respond to multiple experiences and ideas about the world and communicate personal, spiritual, and religious meaning through various modes and media. • engage in constructive dialogue by listening actively to understand the intent, spirit, meaning and context of others’ words, and respond compassionately and with empathy in both verbal and non-verbal ways. • compose and express a wide range of written, spoken, and visual texts to convey information for a variety of purposes that are meaningful to society. • are linguistically sensitive when communicating with others, taking difference and diversity in positive and productive ways. 189 Reflective Lifelong Learner • plan, organize, manage, and evaluate their own thinking, performance, behavior, and physical, mental, and spiritual well being, and adjust them when necessary, for the sake of self-betterment. • reflect on the significance of God/the Numinous/the Divine/the Cosmos and religious and spiritual experiences, for themselves and others. • develop awareness of the spiritual or religious significance of life and its implications on their place in the world. • are open to the excitement of new knowledge and new ways of doing and being. • are able to recreate themselves into new capacities, careers, and service-callings. • carefully and critically adapt to the digitization of their environment, having the ability to humanize technology, understanding that technology is a means, not an end. • understand the nature, potential benefits and risks involved in advancing technologies, especially in the areas of information and computing, biotechnology, nanotechnology, among

others. • are able to practice self-care, always open to positive experiences in life, but appreciating difficulties as necessary for self- strengthening and soul-making. 190 Engaged and Service- Driven Citizen • develop and incorporate Lasallian leadership skills, serving as companions to all in a shared journey of positive social transformation, achieving goals together and by association. • are able to widen their sphere of experience, immerse themselves in situations that allow opportunities to develop genuine compassion by cultivating a way of being- with (kapwa) others. • actively participate in deliberative public forums in order to elevate their understanding of the issues involved. • analyze community, social, and national realities and take an active role in advancing social progress and the common good. • develop and practice effective and inclusive interpersonal skills in order to relate to others in peaceful, tolerant, compassionate and non • discriminatory ways. • nourish relationships with God/the Divine/the Numinous/the Higher Being, one’s self, others, especially the poor and the marginalized, the environment, and their non-human co-dwellers, with compassion, sensitivity, respect, integrity, and empathy. Virtue-Guided Decision- Maker • aspire to be virtuous in thought, speech, and action. • choose values and principles that are aligned with virtues, and decide and act in order to reflect trustworthy character, especially kagandahang-loob and pakikipagkapwa-tao. • consider the welfare of all, especially the poor and marginalized, including the environment, when making impactful decisions. • regularly reflect and critically examine their subscription to certain values and are able to transform them when needed, for the sake of the common good and harmony. • are able to discern well and transform reflection into appropriate action. • take their freedom to choose seriously and responsibly, and have the integrity to acknowledge their accountability. 191 Technically Competent Professional • demonstrate mastery of specialized knowledge and apply it to real world situations. • creatively use specialized knowledge to address new problems and novel situations. • achieve the convergence of humaneness, applications, systems, and processes in creating a work-life balance while optimizing organizational productivity • are open to collaborate with others in different areas of expertise in order to solve problems while staying grounded in one’s identity and able to take a stand based on one’s principles when necessary. • apply the Lasallian Reflection Framework of Masid Danas (Observe-Experience), Suri- Nilay (Analysis Reflection), and Taya-Kilos (Commitment-Action), accompanied by Ramdam-Pakiramdam (Feeling Empathy) when solving problems or addressing issues. 192 OFFICE DIRECTORY AND CAMPUS LAYOUT MANILA CAMPUS TRUNK LINE NUMBER: 02 8465-8900 OR 02 8524-4611 APPENDIX E Department/Office/Unit Local No. Room No. 1911 Insurance Agency Corporation 277 JH-G/F Academic Support for Instructional Services and Technology 563 MH-216 Accountancy 106, 135 FC-G/F Accounting 227 LS-133 Accounting, Budget and Fixed Assets Section 354, 267 LS-133 Accounting, Controller 175 LS-133 Accounting, Disbursement Section 118, 352 LS-133 Accounting, Financials Section 119, 177 LS-133 Accounting, Information Systems Development Section 268 LS-133 Accounting, Payroll 174 LS-133 Accounting, Science Foundation Affiliates 138 LS-133 Accounting, Student Accounts Extension Office 296 LS-133 Accounting, Student Services Section 196 LS-133

Admissons and Scholarships 166 HSSH-2/F Admissions and Scholarships, Graduate Studies Section 468 HSSH-2/F Admissions and Scholarships, Scholarships Section 162 HSSH-2/F Admissions and Scholarships, Undergraduate Studies Section 167 HSSH-2/F Advanced Research Institute for Informatics, Computing and Networking 342 GH-406 Advancement and Alumni Affairs 107, 129 AGH-20/F Alumni Association 122,128,395 AGH-101 Animo Lab 282 AGH-102 Ang Pahayagang Plaridel 701 CH-503 Angelo King Institute for Economic and Business Studies 287 LS-223 Archers Network 701 CH-503 Asian Regional Programme on Environmental Technology 215 AGH-21/F Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Services 597 HSSH-1502 Associate Vice Chancellor for Campus Development 183 YH-610 Associate Vice Chancellor for Campus Services 595 HSSH-1503 Associate Vice Chancellor for Facilities Management 599 HSSH-1501 BAGCED, Academic Programming Officer 266 AGH-1603 193 BAGCED, Dean 121 AGH-1603 BAGCED, External Affairs 172 AGH-1609 BAGCED, Associate Dean 158 AGH-1603 Behavioral Sciences 347, 550 FC-4/F Bienvenido N. Santos Creative Writing Center 233 MH-208 Biology 460 WH-4/F Biology Dispensing Laboratory 462 STRC-402 Biology Laboratry 408, 409 STRC-210 Biology Laboratory and Undergraduate Thesis 467 STRC-210 Biology Stockroom 463 STRC-208 Biotechnology Laboratory 230 SJ-605 Book Store 712 YH-G/F Br. Alfred Shields FSC OCean Research Center 404, 406 HSSH-3/F Br. Andelino Manuel Castillo FSC Religious Educational Foundation Inc. 762 JH-302 Brothers’ Community 139. 140 LS-4/F Building and Grounds Maintenance Office 474 SJ-201 Campus Sustainability Office 272 HSSH-407 CCS, Academic Programming Officer 303 AGH-10/F CCS, Dean 300 AGH-10/F CCS, External Affairs 302 AGH-10/F CCS, Research and Advanced Studies 302 AGH-10/F CCS, Technical Support Group 302 AGH-10/F CCS, Associate Dean 301 AGH-10/F Center for Business Research and Development 149 FC-G/F Center for Engineering and Sustainable Development Research 275 VH-102C Center for Language and Lifelong Learning 403 AGH-1503 Center for Language Technologies 391 GH-409 Center for Lean Systems and Management 223 STRC-223 Center for Micro-Hydro Technology for Rural Electrification 273 MH-113 <Mezzanine Center for Natural Sciences and Environmental Research 404, 406 SJ-206 Center for Professional Development in Business 396 FC-G/F Center for Social Concern and Action 147, 417 CH-202 Office of the Provost, Administrative Officer 801 HSSH-1507 Office of the Provost, Executive Officer 809 HSSH-1507 CHED PHERNet Sustainability Studies Program 127 HSSH-3/F Chemical Engineering 218 AGH-8/F Chemical Engineering Energy Laboratory 211 STRC-107 Chemical Engineering Instrumentation Room 214 STRC-215 Department/Office/Unit Local No. Room No. 194 Chemical Engineering Engineering Laboratory 243 VH-412 Chemistry 430 WH-5/F Chemistry Instrument and Research 501 SJ-512 Chemistry Laboratory 212 VH-410 Chemistry Laboratory 429 SJ-313 Chemistry Laboratory 431 SJ-615 Chemistry Laboratory 432 SJ-508 Chemistry Laboratory 502 STRC-308 Chemistry Laboratory Instructors 366 MH-401 Chemistry Teaching Laboratory 430 WH-5/F Civil and Sanitary Works Office 475 SJ-201 Civil Engineering 226 AGH-8/F Civil Engineering Laboraory 305 STRC-103 CLA, Academic Programming Officer 327 FC-G/F CLA, Dean 325 FC-G/F CLA, External Affairs 216 FC-G/F CLA, Research and Advanced Studies 328 FC-G/F CLA, Associate Dean 326 FC-G/F Commercial Law 132 FC-2/F Communication 322 FC-3/F Computational Chemistry Laboratory 405 STRC-301 Computational Materials Design Research Group 422 STRC-315 Computer Engineering Laboratory 253 VH-313 Computer Laboratory, Gokongwei Hall 341 GH-404 Computer Laboratory, Gokongwei Hall 384 GH-306A/B Computer Laboratory, Gokongwei Hall 385 GH-304A

Computer Laboratory, Gokongwei Hall 386 GH-304B Computer Laboratory, Gokongwei Hall 387 GH-302A/B Computer Laboratory, Gonzalez Hall 258 AGH-1706 Computer Laboratory, St. Joseph Hall 418 SJ-212 Computer Laboratory, St. La Salle Hall 193 LS-212 Computer Laboratory, St. La Salle Hall 219 LS-229 Computer Laboratory, St. La Salle Hall 382 LS-335 Computer Laboratory, St. La Salle Hall 505 LS-320 Computer Laboratory, Velasco Hall 213 VH-103 Computer Laboratory, Velasco Hall 242 VH-208B Computer Laboratory, Velasco Hall 364 VH-301 Computer Laboratory, Velasco Hall 383 VH-310 195 Computer Laboratory, Yuchengco Hall 351 YH-602 Computer Technology 306 AGH-10/F Computer Technology Laboratory 292 GH-408 Consulting and Education Center 304 GH-102 Continuing Education Office 390 AGH-21/F COS, Dean 520 WH-2/F COS, External Affairs 522 WH-2/F COS, Associate Dean 521 WH-2/F Council of Student Organizations 744 CH-403 Counseling and Career Services Extension Office 389 AGH-1505 Counseling and Career Services, Career Services Unit 416 CH-203 Counseling and Career Services, Counseling Unit 419 CH-203 Counseling and Educational Psychology 172 AGH-1609 Concierge 400 YH-G/F Credit Cooperative 750 JH-205 Culture and Arts Office 702, 737 CH-505 Culture and Arts Office, Rehearsal Room 311 ERSC-204 Data Privacy Office 811 LS-124 Decision Sciences and Innovation 134, 188 FC-2/F Decision Sciences and Innovation, Business Incubator 125 LS-108 DOST Science Education Institute 343 LS-229 Mezzanine ECE Electrical/Electronics Laboratory 711 VH-403 ECE Extension Office 565 MH-116 ECE Research Laboratory Coordinator’s Office 207 STRC-1112 ECE STRC-EC Laboratory 206 STRC-112 Economics 137 LS-324 Educational Leadership and Management 171, 195 AGH-1610 Electrical Laboratory 312 MH-402 Electronics and Communications Engineering 224 AGH-8/F Electronics and Instrumentation Laboratory 465 STRC-414 Employees Association 754 JH-201 Engineering Research and Development for Technology 324 AGH-910 English and Applied Linguistics 530, 562, 564 AGH-1501 English Language Laboratory 340 AGH-1408 Enrollment Services Hub - Help Desk 114 HSSH-2/F Enterprise Resource Planning - BITUIN 458 LS-203 Ergonomics and Product Design Laboratory 209 STRC-218 Faculty Association 332 FC-G/F 196 Filipino 509, 552 FC-3/F Financial Management 133 FC-2/F Food Institute 401 HSSH-3/F Former President 247 HSSH-1507 GCOE, Dean 229 AGH-908 GCOE, External Affairs 278 AGH-910 GCOE, Laboratories 210 AGH-910 GCOE, Research and Advanced Studies 217 AGH-910 GCOE, Transportation Laboratory 231 MH-104A GCOE, Associate Dean 201 AGH-909 Graduate Student Council 733 CH-401 Green and White 205 CH-503 Green GIant FM 208 BH-G/F Health Services Office 221 VH-101 Health Services Office Extenstion 334 ERSC-G/F History 461, 572 FC-3/F Industrial Engineering 220 AGH-8/F Information Systems Laboratory 284 VH-506 Information Technology 307 AGH-810/F Information Technology Services Office 310 GH-308 Innovation and Technology Office 248 LS-114 Institutional Testing and Evalutation Office 143, 168 HSSH-4/F Intellect Seminar Room 355 GH-101 Intellectual Property Office 279 HSSH-3/F Intelligent Systems Laboratory 353 MH-106 International Center 289 SJ-207 International Studies 545 FC-4/F Inventory Management Office 190, 191 Warehouse - 101 ITS, Asset Management 317 GH-303 ITS, Systems Management and Services 309 GH-308 ITS, Technology Infrastrstucture and Assets 349 GH-305 ITS, Technology Support and Laboratories - Help Desk 316, 466 GH-305 ITS, Web Management and Documentation 318 GH-309 Jesse M. Robredo Institute of Governance 524 YH-601 Lasallian Core Curriculum Office 156 AGH-1504 Lasallian

Institute for Development and Educational Research 435 AGH-1603 Lasallian Pastoral Office 104, 410 SJ-101 Lasallian Pastoral Office, Chaplain 412 SJ-103 197 Laser and Optics Laboratory 424 STRC-313 Legal Counsel 173 HSSH-1410 Libraries 600 HSSH-6/F Libraries, Acquisition Section 610 HSSH-6/F Libraries, American Studies Resource Center 265 HSSH-14/F Libraries, Archives Section 640, 621 HSSH-10/F Libraries, Br. Benedict Learning Resoruce Center 288 AGH-1804 Libraries, Cataloguing 601 HSSH-5/F Libraries, Circulation Section 622 HSSH-8/F Libraries, European Documentation Center 602 HSSH-14/F Libraries, Filipiniana Section 262 HSSH-10/F Libraries, Information Desk 262 HSSH-6/F Libraries, Media and Systems Service 370 HSSH-6/F Libraries, Periodicals Section 291 HSSH-9/F Libraries, Reference Section 620 HSSH-7/F Literature 532, 541 FC-3/F Malate Library Folio 701 CH-503 Management and Organization 381 FC-G/F Manufacturing Engineering and Management 244 AGH-8/F Marketing and Advertising 136 FC-2/F Math and Statistics Computer Laboratory 407 STRC-314 Mathematics 420 WH-6/F Mathematics Reserach Office 413 SJ-205 Matrix Laboratory 263 GH-403 ME Bench Work and Fabrication Shop Laboratory 255 MH-108 ME Machine Shop and Foundry Laboratory 254 VH-105 ME Power and Thermodynamics Laboratory 254 MH-110 Mechanical and Electrical Works Office 477 SJ-201 Mechanical Engineering 299, 308 AGH-8/F Mechatronics Laboratory 503 STRC-105 MEM Comp. Aided Three-Dimensional Interactive Application 241 VH-109 MEM Comp. Numeric Control/Comp. Integrated Manufacturing Laboratory 240 H-106 Molecular Science Unit Biology CENSER 372 STRC-205 Multipurpose Room 506 HSSH-4/F Nano Laboratory 425 STRC-113 NSTP and Formation Office 436 GH-102 Operation Big Brother 142 AGH-1803 Pablo Nicolas Seminar Room 363 LS-315 198 Parents of University Students Organization 764 JH-304 Personal Effectiveness Office 250 AGH-1803 CCHRSO 680 HSSH-3/F CCHRSO - Front Desk 676 HSSH-3/F Philosophy 546 FC-4/F Physical Education 740 ERSC-702 Physics 450 WH-7/F Physics Supplies Room 452 SJ-409 Political Science 570 FC-4/F Practical Genomics Laboratory, CENSER 406 STRC-412 President’s Office, Executive Assistant 802 HSSH-1507 President and Provost, Reception 803 HSSH-1507 Procurement Office 630 Warehouse-101 Project Management Office 181 YH-610 Psychology 542 FC-4/F Psyhcology Laboratory 752 SJ-308 Psychometric and Assessment Laboratory 329 MH-207 Publishing House 271 YH-601 Quality Assurance Office 567, 582 HSHH-1506 Radio and TV Studio Laboratory 321 MH-209 Registrar 245 HSSH-2/F Registrar, Enrollment and Evaluation Section 116 HSSH-2/F Senior Financial Consultant to the President 592 LS-133 Senior High School, Front Desk 160, 161 LS-118 Senior High School, Office of the Principal 169 LS-123 Senior High School, SDFO 330 LS-122 Senior High School, Student Affairs Office/Guidance Counseling Office 331 LS-121 Social Development Research Center 402 WH-3/F SOE, Dean 380 LS-221 SOE, Associate Dean 380 LS-221 Software Technology 313 AGH-10/F Sports Development 379, 742 ERSC-901 Sports Development, Physical Fitness and Rehabilitation Center 197 ERSC-9/F Office for Strategic Communications (STRATCOM) 144, 246, 374 AGH-21/F Strategic Management 582 HSSH-1506 Student Affairs, Dean 730 CH-301 Student Affairs, Associate Dean 276 CH-301 Student Discipline Formation Office 414 SJ-115 199 Student Discipline Formation Office, Discipline and Endorsement Section 611 MH-115A Student Discipline Formation Office, Discipline Educ, Advocacy and Program Section 611 MH-115B Student Discipline Formation Office, Lost and Found and Clearance Section 290 SJ-105 Student Leadership Involvement, Formation and Empowerment 732, 739 CH-404 Student Media Office 738 CH-501 Support Services Office 766

HSSH-407 Support Services Office, Mailing Unit 151 LS-106 Support Services Office, Materials Reproduction Unit 170 LS-125 Support Services Office, Transportation Unit 148 HSSH-407 Surface Physica Laboratory 423 STRC-311 Research Grants and Management Office 164 HSSH-3/F Teresa Yuchengco Auditorium 283 YH-7/F The LaSallian 701 CH-503 The Museum 368 YH-2/F The Store 724 YH-G/F Theology and Religious Education 199, 534 FC-3/F Tokyo Institute of Technology - Philippine Office 232 VH-510 Unit Operations and Refrigeration Laboratory 234 VH-102 Univeristy Fellows 270 YH-2/F University Safety Office 123 HSSH-406 University Safety Office, Lifeguard 533 ERSC-G/F University Student Government 734 CH-302 Vice President for Academics 108, 109 HSSH-1508 Vice President for Administration 557 HSSH-1504 Vice President for Research and Innovation 401 HSSH-3/F Vice Presidentfor DLSU - Lagunda Campus (Extension Office) 576 LS-118 Vice President for External Relations and Internationalization Office 163, 574 HSSH-1505 Vice President for Lasallian Mission 120, 280 HSSH-1511 Vocations Ministry Office 159 LS-115 William Shaw Little Theater 314 WH-103 Yuchengco Center 165 YH-2/F Yuchengco Seminar Room 336, 337 YH-407,408,409 200 HOTLINE NUMBERS LEGEND GATE NUMBERS Service Local No. Building Emergency 111 St. La Salle Hall Health Services 222 Br. Gabriel Conon FSC Hall Health Services 333 Enrique M. Razon Sports Center Security 444 St. La Salle Hall Security 555 Br. Andrew B. Gonzalez FSC Hall Facilities 666 Henry Sy Sr. Hall Reservation 777 Henry Sy Sr. Hall Gate Label Local No. Gate 1 (South) 481 Gate 2 (North) 482 Gate 3 (Velasco) 483 Gate 4 (Gokongwei) 484 Gate 5 (Andrew) 485 Gate 6 (STRC) 487 Gate (Leveriza) 489 Acronym College/Building AGH Br. Andrew B. Gonzalez FSC Hall BAGCED Br. Andrew B. Gonzalez FSC College of Education BH Br. Alphonsus Bloemen FSC Hall CCS College of Computer Studies CH Br. Gabriel Connon FSC Hall CLA College of Liberal Arts COS College of Science ERSC Enrique M. Razon Sports Center FC Faculty Center 201 GCOE Gokongwei Collge of Engineering GH John Gokongwei Sr. Hall HSSH Henry S. Sy Sr. Hall JH Br. Celba John FSC Hall LS St. La Salle Hall MH St. Miguel Febres Cordero Hall RVRCOB Ramon V. del Rosario Collge of Business SJ St. Joseph Hall SOE School of Economics SOL School of Law STRC Science and Technology Research Center VH Urbano J. Velasco Hall WH William J. Shaw Hall YH Don Enrique T. Yuchengco Hall MAKATI CAMPUS TRUNK LINE NUMBER: 753-4611 Cnt Department/Office/unit Room Local No. Direct Line 1 Switch Board Operator Dialo 0 753-4616 2 Enrollment Services Hub XR0501 111 3 Enrollment Services Hub XR0501 112 4 Health Services Office XR0518 106 5 Director for Satellite Campus Facilities XR0521 101 6 Libraries XR0504 103 7 CPDBE XR0523a 105 753-4617 8 RVRCOB, Associate Dean XR0521 107 753-4618 202 Department/Office/Unit Local No. Accounting 604 COL, Academic Programming Officer 611 COL, Dean 606 COL, Associate Dean 608 Counseling and Career Services 701 Director for Satellite Campus Facilities 601 Enrollment Services Hub 602 Facilities Management Group 103 Health Services Office 613 Information Technology Services Office - Helpdesk 603 Libraries 703 Libraries, Instructional Media Services

704 Security Office 102 Security Office, Receptionist 101 Security Office, Switch Board Operator 100 Students Affairs, Dean 700 Student Discipline Formation Office 702 Service Local No. Emergency 111 Health Services 222 Security 444 Facilties 666 RUFINO CAMPUS TRUNK LINE NUMBER: 753-0000 OR 877-9244 HOTLINE NUMBERS 203 Given the hybrid setting, students may communicate with the University’s administrative offices, they could communicate with them through the University’s hotline: (632) 8524-4611 / 8465-8900 or through the respective email addresses found below: Office E-mail Office of the President president@dlsu.edu.ph Office of the Provost provost@dlsu.edu.ph Office of the University Registrar registrar@dlsu.edu.ph Finance and Accounting Office cashiers@dlsu.edu.ph accounting@dlsu.edu.ph Office of Admissions and Scholarships Undergraduate Admission: admission.requirements@dlsu. edu.ph Graduate Admission: graduate. admissions@dlsu.edu.ph Scholarships: scholarships@dlsu. edu.ph VIA MOBILE Undergraduate Admissions: 0927-760-6560 (Globe) 0999-363-6546 (Smart) Graduate Admissions: 0927-985-1103 (Globe) Scholarships: 0961-008-4354 (Smart) Libraries library@dlsu.edu.ph Office of Student Affairs dsa@dlsu.edu.ph Office of Counseling and Career Services occs@dlsu.edu.ph Student Discipline Formation Office sdfo@dlsu.edu.ph Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well-Being lcidw@dlsu.edu.ph Office of the Executive Director for Campus Services campus.services@dlsu.edu.ph Office of the Associate Provost academic.services@dlsu.edu.ph Office of Vice President for External Relations and Internationalization erio@dlsu.edu.ph 204 CAMPUS LAYOUT - MANILA CAMPUS 205 CAMPUS LAYOUT - LAGUNA CAMPUS 206 APPENDIX F UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS Council of Student Organizations ACCESS The Council of Student Organizations (CSO) is the union of accredited professional (PROF), special interest (SPIN) and socio-civic organizations of De La Salle University. Since its founding in 1974, the Council has continuously delivered quality student services and has produced outstanding student leaders dedicated to serving and contributing to the Lasallian Community. To support the preparation, execution, and documentation of the activities, projects, and initiatives of the accredited organizations, nine Executive Teams work under the supervision of the CSO Executive Board. The CSO Executive Board also serves as the coordinating body of the Council and oversees the implementation of university-wide activities participated in by the different organizations. These activities include the Annual Recruitment Week (ARW), Green Card Alliance (GCA), the Lasallian Excellence Awards (LEA) and the Lasallian Enrichment Alternative Program (LEAP) which is a joint venture of the Council of Student Organizations and the University Student Government. The DLSU-CSO is also a founding member of the Philippine Union of Lasallian Student Organizations (PULSO) which is an alliance between the CSOs and its counterparts in the 11 Lasallian Tertiary Institutions in the Philippines. Our contemporary society has increasingly embraced the use of technology in many aspects of human life. One with the Lasallian mission, the Association of Computer Engineering Students (ACCESS) breeds the leaders of tomorrow in this field by inspiring its members to advance a culture that values innovation in the realm of computer engineering while having a deep sense of their social responsibility as members of a civilization being brought closer by technology. The Association seeks to enrich the Lasallian experience of its members by implementing high quality and exciting activities that would provide students an avenue to explore their potentials and employ their skills in their quest for excellence

to uplift the quality of life of every individual in society. 207 Ad Create AIESEC AMSTUD The AdCreate Society is DLSU’s professional organization for advertising management majors, as well as to those who want to engage their ideas and explore their creativity by letting its members imagine, create, and achieve. Members are able to IMAGINE the endless possibilities with the potential that they have through AdCreate’s seminars and workshops from only the best of the best in the advertising, marketing, and communications industry. AdCreate also hones the creative skills of its members by letting them CREATE their best work through Monster Academy—a crash course on Photoshop and Illustrator. AdCreate also lets its members ACHIEVE by hosting contests held by companies in the real world, as well as freelance projects, which are undoubtedly value-adding to any student’s creative portfolio. Given all these, members of the organization not only enjoy the benefits of it being a member-oriented organization, but also the opportunity to collaborate, to grow, and to be part of a family. AIESEC is a global youth- led organization striving to achieve peace and fulfillment of humankind’s potential by activating leadership qualities in youth through learning from practical experiences in challenging environments. Together with partner organizations, AIESEC facilitates a network of cross-cultural exchanges in the form of volunteering experiences and professional internships. The Organization for American Studies (AMSTUD) is the home organization for American Studies majors and enthusiasts in De La Salle University. It envisions itself as a professional student organization that seeks to promote the culture and ideals of the American society to the globalized world and to be fully recognized by various governmental and non-governmental institutions in the Philippines. AMSTUD serves as an instrument for De La Salle University to achieve prominent international status and will provide the means and education to keep the members abreast with the local and international affairs which habitually involves the United States of America and the significant trends in the American society and culture that can contribute to the members’ self-development and to the nation in the long-run. 208 Archers for UNICEF BMS BSS Archers for UNICEF is the official De La Salle University chapter of United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund Philippines (UNICEF Philippines). With its family of volunteers, AU aims to enact on its mission of targeting a haven for the children. While being a leg of the Private Partnership and Fundraising Division of UNICEF, the organization serves as an avenue to raise national awareness and enact on prominent social issues as well, through student volunteers with the compassion to address the negligence of basic children’s rights. The organization aims to fulfill St. John Baptist De La Salle’s vision of an empowered society with AU envisioning a brighter future for the children through the integration of Lasallian values depicted in various charitable endeavors. Throughout the years of sustained excellence, the Business Management Society is one of the top professional student organizations in De La Salle University. The organization takes pride in its

dedicated members whose holistic formation is honed through academic excellence, organizational innovation, personal development, and social responsibility. This institution shapes competent business leaders who will soon be the catalysts of nation building, social dependability, and economic development. The Business Management Society caters to Business Management, Applied Corporate Management, and Interdisciplinary Business Studies students. It is committed to fostering passionate student leaders, maximizing potentials, and providing developmental opportunities for Lasallian business students. The Behavioral Sciences Society (BSS) serves as the official organization of the Behavioral Sciences degree programs (AB-OSDM & AB-SPM). It is committed in implementing academic, socio-civic, and developmental activities that benefit the Behavioral Sciences community. It envisions a student organization that initiates, organizes, and leads projects that employ perspectives found in Behavioral Sciences courses such as social research, organizational development, human resource management, and program development. 209 CES CHEMSOC Civil Engineering Society, also known as CES, is a well-recognized and accredited professional organization for Civil Engineering students of De La Salle University-Manila. Serving the students since 1986, the organization aims to nurture and to shape its members to become not only intellectually competent, but also driven by social responsibility and awareness. Over the years, CES has been bridging connections and creating opportunities to make sure its members are built to build their future, and are guided by the Lasallian faith. Through the Society’s innovation of diverse and holistic activities, the Society has become a home and training ground for Lasallian students to become achievers for God and country, and to develop into individuals in pursuit of excellence. Being the only accredited organization in DLSU for Civil Engineering students, CES offers multifold activities that would enhance the students’ characters and develop their skills such as: leadership and career trainings that prepares them for life outside the university; academic events that trains the mind, improves the students competence and assists students in their academic needs; and socio-civic programs that provides students the opportunities to create a mark and make a change for a better future. It’s through these interactions that the Civil Engineering Society slowly grows a familial bond amongst each other through the spirit of camaraderie and friendship. The Chemistry Society, hereunto known as ChemSoc, is the professional organization of aspiring Chemistry majors. For the past years, it has embodied its exemplification of providing a deeper understanding of chemistry to others. Established for its testaments of developing students, ChemSoc cultivates ideas that transcend the potentials of its constituents. It is dedicated to the holistic development of its members by providing activities involving personal, career, spiritual, and societal involvement. The Chemistry Society aims to enhance the everyday appreciation of science by developing innovative and complex projects through basic ideas. 210 CHEN CULTURA DANUM The Chemical Engineering Society is a service-oriented organization in De La Salle University whose main purpose is to mold future Chemical Engineers who embody the Lasallian core values. In alignment with its purpose, ChEn aims to accomplish its four missions, mainly: C - Complementing the department’s efforts in

developing well-rounded Lasallian Chemical Engineers, H - Highlighting the role of the Chemical Engineering profession in the society, E - Elevating the standards of the organization to excellence, and N- Nurturing the existing relationship among faculty, members, officers, other organizations, and other technical staff. Ready to cultivate the Lasallian community through versatile minds and revolutionary ideas. Diverse in perception, united by one vision: As an organization led by literature majors, its resolve lies in community building. Cultura works toward spreading the idea that opens people to many cultures and cultural practices that define human experience in the ways simplest or complex. The approach is simple: acquaintance to cultural studies education. Despite the rigidity, “education” encompasses its formal terms and covers all forms of learning including discourse, immersion, even experimentation. Essentially, art and culture cannot be measured, only experienced. Dalubhasaan ng mga Umuusbong na Mag- aaral ng Araling Filipino (DANUM), ang nag- iisang organisasyon naglalayong payabungin ang wika at kultura na ipinamana sa atin sa pamamagitan ng midya. Kami ang opisyal na organisasyon ng programang Batsilyer ng Sining sa Araling Pilipinas Medyor sa Filipino sa Mass Media o AB-PHS. Patuloy na ipinagdidiwang ang sining ng mga manlilikhang makabayan para sa bansang sinilangan. 211 ECES ECO The Electronics and Communications Engineering Society, commonly known as ECES, is a professional organization that caters to ECE students, Lasallian electronics hobbyists and individuals fascinated by electronics and communications technologies. ECES serves the members by aiding in their academic growth through tutorials, reviewer distributions, STRC lab access, plant visits, and annual quiz bees. Moreover, it does its best to develop its members’ skills through activities whose nature is of their interest like the numerous sports activities, career seminars and computer/electronics related competitions, and conventions. ECES has also served the community through its annual outreach program and other socio-civic activities. In addition, ECES continues to have strong ties with its national and international organization counterparts, namely, Institute of Electronics & Communications Engineers of the Philippines (IECEP), and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). As one of the best premier organizations of DLSU, ECES has been continuously receiving awards from different award giving bodies. ECES was recognized Most Outstanding Organization in the Lasallian Excellence Awards 2001, 2003, and 2008- 2010. Furthermore, ECES was recognized as DLSU’s #1 Professional Organization for two straight years (2008-2010). De La Salle University Environmental Conservation Organization started on October 1, 2013 at De La Salle University – Laguna Campus (formerly Science and Technology Complex). The organization commits to pursue the members personal growth and development through various environmental and outdoor activities that promote environmental awareness as well as disaster preparedness, as active members of a dynamic and progressive De La Salle community and to the nation as a whole. 212 ECONORG ENGLICOM The Economics Organization is a professional organization based at De La Salle University-Manila. Its main goals are to hone students into paragons of academic excellence and beacons of service, to strengthen social involvement, and to promote personal growth among its

members by serving as a link of communication and involvement among sectors of the community. The organization initiates programs and projects that establish camaraderie, and reinforce academic learning among members through various activities that incorporate the Lasallian mission – Religio, Mores, et Cultura – and through formal linkages with internal and external sectors whose goals and objectives are cognate and parallel to that of the organization. ENGLICOM, founded in 1964, is an abbreviation of the three initial colleges at the time - Engineering, Liberal Arts, and Commerce. Being one of the oldest and most diverse among the numerous organizations in De La Salle University, ENGLICOM was created with a vision to promote cultural harmony, social awareness and nation-building among the Filipino and Chinese-Filipino students. With this in mind, the organization promotes its mission through the four pillars supporting its core values; namely: socio-civic, social, cultural, and leadership development. By offering such diverse programs, ENGLICOM inspires excellence and passion through its dedication to students and to its fellow countrymen - helping the university in molding Lasallian achievers for God and country. 213 ESA GAS The European Studies Association is made of European studies majors and members who have a keen in interest in the western region’s history, culture, and fad. ESA help its members in maximizing opportunities that can help them in their future careers and make the most out of there are of study. We have embassy visits, language tutorials, career talk, and seminars provided by the European diplomats. ESA is the first student organization to be recognized by the Commission of the European Community and is also endorsed by all European Embassies in the Philippines; as such, it plays a vital role in motivating its members and the Lasallian community towards strengthening Asian- European relations. The European Studies Association, also, aims to foster both local and global understanding through cultural, social, and academic education. It also strives to promote awareness, knowledge, learning, and application of significant national and global issues that contribute to self-development and national progress. The organization achieves its goals by providing and organizing learning opportunities such as interactions with diplomats and significant social figures, academic talks and seminars, and cultural activities. Gakuen Anime Soshiki is a special interest organization that caters to students interested in Japanese media culture such as anime, manga, cosplay, games, music and the like. GAS aims to create an interactive and socially relevant community of people with common interests; and inspire, encourage and enhance the skills and talents of its members through their common interests. Based in De La Salle University - Laguna Campus in Biñan, Laguna, it accepts members from its home-campus and De La Salle University – Taft. 214 IMES JEMA One of the professional organization under the Council of Student Organizations, is recognized as the Industrial Management Engineering Society (IMES), and is geared towards serving Industrial Engineering, Industrial Management Engineering Minor in Information Technology and Industrial Management Engineering Minor in Service Management students. As a professional organization in De

La Salle University, the Industrial Management Engineering Society (IMES) aims to cultivate unity and competence across all Industrial Management Engineering Society (IMES) members. It serves as a guide and an aid to the academic needs of its members. Acts as an avenue for job placements and/or initiate activities for this objective. Moreover, it to initiates activities geared towards the interaction and unity of all Industrial Management Engineering Society (IMES) members. Hence, just like the course it represents, IMES optimizes the development of its members not only by supporting them in their academics but also by exposing them in different extra- curricular, developmental, socio-civic, and spiritual activities. “There’s always a Better way” in the Industrial Management Engineering Society just like its course manifests. The Junior Entrepreneurs’ Marketing Association (JEMA) is the professional organization for both marketing and non-marketing students who aim to develop and enhance their marketing and entrepreneurial skills. In line with this, JEMA provides for the growth and development of its members through quality service and works of excellence, producing valuable assets to society. 215 JEMA KAUNLARAN LLS The Junior Philippine Institute of Accountants (JPIA) is the premier professional student organization for accountancy students in De La Salle University. With more than 60 years of providing quality activities to its members, JPIA produces well-rounded individuals who are technically competent to do their business engagements and know how to enjoy and live life to the fullest. It complements the academic training of future CPAs through book service, tutorials, and supplementary lectures. With its motto of “Bringing Balance to Life” JPIA also spearheads non-academic and socio-civic activities which empower and strengthen each and everyone’s individuality and sense of responsibility. Outside the university, JPIA is a member of the National Federation of the Junior Philippine Institute of Accountants (NFJPIA), an organization comprising of different local JPIA chapters which share the same goal of molding highly qualified and competent future accountants in order to promote and improve the business sector of the country. Envisioning itself as a learning organization whose members – animated by faith, service, and communion – engage in holistic development work and good governance for nation building. Kaunlaran dreams of the Philippines as a nation of empowered communities and a just society. Its mission is to advocate for the relevant and integrative application of various academic disciplines in the interest of marginalized or basic sectors in the Philippine society. It promotes awareness of development theory and practice, trains youth leaders toward responsible citizenship, and helps build and sustain various forms of university and community partnerships. LEY LA SALLE was established in 1988 for the sole purpose of highlighting service and advocacy directed at its legal management student members and other constituents of the academe. Throughout its 20+ years of operations, Ley’s achievements in the field of promoting relevant and adequate legal intuition has been a generous source of pride not just for its members, but also for the La Salle administration. Undoubtedly, Ley is still and will continue to be

the most highly regarded professional organization under the Council of Student Organizations. 216 LSCS MAFIA MC La Salle Computer Society (LSCS) is the only professional organization in the College of Computer Studies accredited by the Council of Student Organizations in De La Salle University. For 30 years, LSCS has been committed in the holistic development of its members’ skill and knowledge through academic and non-academic activities, and seminars. These activities aim to provide avenues to the students to learn things that are beyond the requirements of their academic subjects and to deepen their interest in technology and the industry. The Management of Financial Institutions Association, founded in 1978, is a duly recognized professional organization of De La Salle University that caters to Management of Financial Institutions majors, and is open to those who want to learn more about the different aspects in Finance. The organization believes in nurturing the talents of its members by opening opportunities that would develop the best version of themselves through personal development, academic excellence, social awareness, and leadership seminars and workshops. The Management of Financial Institutions Association also strives to provide an organization that the members could call their home. The DLSU Mathematics Circle is an organization for all undergraduate Mathematics enthusiasts. Inspired by the teachings of St. John Baptist de La Salle, the organization envisions a society to committed proactive leaders who have the passion for mathematics and the dedication to share this passion with others. Through the years, the organization continuously pursues mathematical research, mathematical appreciation, membership involvement, and nation building, among others. The organization believes that it is through these four areas of development that the organization unites with the University’s mission of becoming Lasallian Christian Achievers for God and Country. By being part of the Circle, we cultivate an atmosphere where students will be able to utilize the greatest tool mankind has ever produced - Mathematics. 217 MES NKK The Mechanical Engineering Society (MES) is the primary professional student-based organization of the Mechanical Engineering program in De La Salle University–Manila. Founded on the year 1977, MES- DLSU is one of the oldest engineering organizations in DLSU. Mechanical Engineering chapter organizations such as PSME, ASME, and ASHRAE are all under the Mechanical Engineering Society. The objectives of the MES are: • to help in the development of its members’ competence in the field of Mechanical Engineering. • to promote the mission statement of DLSU: “religio, mores, et cultura”, and ensure the intellectual, social, and moral well-being and growth of all its members. • to foster a positive relationship and understanding between the members of the society, the faculty, and the administration of the University. • to align the goals and serve as the supervisor of the following organizations: American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers – De La Salle University – Manila Student Chapter (ASHRAE DLSU Student Chapter), American Society of Mechanical Engineers – De La Salle University Student Section (ASME DLSU Student Section), and Philippine Society of Mechanical Engineers

– De La Salle University Student Unit (PSME – DLSUSU). Nihon Kenkyuu Kai or the Japan Studies Society is the professional organization for Japanese Studies Majors of De La Salle University, and for students who are interested in Japan. NKK fosters mutual understanding in building bridges of friendship between Filipinos and Japanese by hosting events that showcase Japanese culture, customs, language and society for all students who are interested in Japan. Nihon Kenkyū Kai accommodates the academic needs of the Japanese Studies Majors while also serving as a channel to Japan-related topics of interest for non-Japanese Studies Majors. Our organization promotes a friendly atmosphere among all its members and ensures a dynamic exchange of ideas and culture related to Japan. 218 OC PHYSOC PILOSOPO The DLSU Outdoor Club is a leading college outdoor club in the Philippines committed to provide vast outdoor activities, to develop nationalistic and competitive members, and to produce prime movers for sustainable development. Where the members believe in the nature’s intrinsic worth and also provide recreational opportunity, spiritual renewal, and ecological and economic health for the country. By becoming involved in the outdoors, people come to understand the value of a clean and healthy environment. They learn to appreciate the delicate balance of nature while experiencing the recreational opportunities that nature has to offer. The organization will build a constituency of dedicated individuals The Physics Society’s members comprise of mostly Physics Majors, Engineering students, and physics enthusiasts among the Lasallian community. We conduct activities include, though not limited to, field trips, leadership training, and activities that aim to encourage students to appreciate physics in their everyday lives. Samahan ng mga Lasalyanong Pilosopo is the professional student organization of philosophy majors who envision a community of individuals who are enthused of the search for the truth, thereby making it a community of critical and liberal thinkers, a community of individuals who are brave enough to be heard and are pro-active, and also, are appreciative of the mysteries of human existence. Our mission is to establish the organization that is student-friendly, driven to achieve the ideals set forth by the objectives of St. John Baptist de La Salle, and provide opportunities not just to the members but to the whole community as well to appreciate the significance of Philosophy in our daily lives. 219 POLISCY ROTARACT SDH The Political Science Society is the oldest political organization in De La Salle University-Manila and it was established in 1984 for those individuals who are interested in learning more about the socio-political and economic structures in our society. Its vision and mission is grounded upon the role of uplifting student awareness and involvement towards meaningful, effective and progressive political participation. It aims to advance political awareness and critical thinking in order to empower individuals to be catalysts for social change. In response to its goal, the organization continuously develops a broad range of activities that enables individuals to both raise awareness and engage in community development. Chartered in the year 1998,

the Rotaract Club of De La Salle University (RAC DLSU) is recognized as part of the alliance of special interest and socio civic organizations (ASPIRE) of De la Salle University-Manila. Rotaract Club of DLSU is sponsored by the Rotary Club of Manila and registered in the Rotary International District 3810. We, the officers and members of this club, are fully committed on the club’s mission to hone members on becoming future leaders of the country. This club is conducting different socio-civic projects believing that through these, we are able to contribute to the society at the same time enhance the leadership skills of our officers and members. Sociedad de Historia is all about looking at a wider perspective of the things through a profound interest and understanding of the human past. We gather students who are passionate about history; from East to West, ancient to modern, and everything in between! At the same time, we seek to nurture the students’ critical abilities and humanistic creative potentials so that they may find self-fulfillment and serve as catalysts of social transformation. And as always, we will strive to be at the school’s forefront in the preservation and cultivation of human knowledge through the initiation of history-related activities. 220 SME SMS SV The Society of Manufacturing Engineers DLSU Student Chapter 200 (SME DLSU) is the professional student organization that caters to the Manufacturing Engineering and Management (MEM) students of De La Salle University-Manila. Under the banner of its mother organization, SME USA, SME DLSU is a world-class community united in molding well-rounded engineers who are the forerunners in the advancement and development of the Philippine manufacturing industry. Amongst its main goals, SME DLSU aims to provide a means of professional development, academic excellence, image enhancement, and special activities development for its members through the activities the organization provides. Through these activities, its officers and members will encounter experiences that will holistically shape and mold its members to be the next generation of Filipino innovators in the future. Ang Samahan ng mga Mag-aaral sa Sikolohiya ay isang propesyonal na organisasyon sa De La Salle University. Patuloy na itinataguyod ng SMS ang pag-aaral at pagpapaunlad ng Sikolohiya bilang malawak at makabuluhang pag-unawa at pagtangkilik sa iba’t ibang aspeto ng kurso. Hangad din nitong mapagbuklod ang mga mag-aaral pati na rin ang mga guro at ang buong komunidad ng Sikolohiya tungo sa maayos na pagkakaisa. Ito ay ipinapatupad sa pamamagitan ng pagsasagawa ng mga talakayan, lektyur at iba pang mga gawaing makakatulong sa kanilang pag-unlad at pagkatao. Societas Vitae, the professional organization of Biology students, aims to provide holistic development through conducting activities that will further nourish their knowledge and hone their skills in line with various fields of Biology and Medicine. The organization is part of the Biology Majors Alliance of the Philippines and the Alliances of Pre-Medical Societies in the Philippines. Societas Vitae envisions to enable its members to be productive and progressive citizens for God and country by utilizing their skills in their

chosen fields. 221 TEAMCOMM UNISTO Team Communication is the professional school organization of Communication Arts and Organizational Communication majors in DLSU. For 17 years, it has provided a home for Communication students where they can freely hone their talents and develop untapped skills in all forms of media. The organization offers activities and services which give students the opportunity to grow into competent professionals, instilled with them are the virtues of a true Lasallian leader. As communication majors, they are committed to being a voice and to getting the message across effectively. UNISTO is focused on the rights and development of International Students studying at De La Salle University -Manila. Its goals are to further awareness of the International Student population to the students, faculty and personnel involved with DLSU while forming camaraderie among International and Filipino students. Through celebration of all represented cultures and exploration into the foreign culture that its members reside in, UNISTO hopes to further the spirit of respect and multiculturalism that transcends beliefs and nationality. 222 UNITED WG The Union of Students Inspired towards Education, or UNITED, is the professional organization for the College of Education guided by the Lasallian principle, working with the heart to live a life of service to teach minds, touch hearts and transform lives. This organization is under De La Salle University-Manila, located at 2401 Taft Avenue, Manila. UNITED, is a professional organization of the College of Education, striving for excellence and catering to the needs of education students. This organization aims to ignite passion for education and to mold its members to become advocates of education who will contribute to the Philippine Educational System. UNITED also aims to be the voice about the importance of Education; and that this will be heard to the rest of the DLSU community. In the light of this vision, UNITED aspires to holistically develop its members into becoming future teacher leaders striving for excellence. Thus, this organization shall provide venues for character development activities, enhancing professional and personal skills to maximize the student’s potential. UNITED also believes that education is the key to success. This is why UNITED members use their talents and skills in teaching to help the society grow. Socio-civic activities that promote social awareness and the spirit of volunteerism will also be hosted in order to better serve the needs of others and ourselves as leaders. Since 1979, Writers’ Guild has been Redefining Writing by not only providing venues for Lasallians for inspiration and discovery, but also ways for its members to broaden their writing experience. It strives to develop the perception of the Lasallians to the value of writing, through course-related and other literary works. It exposes its members to different areas of learning and forms writing as an expression by means of meaningful and worthwhile seminars and other activities. 223 YES Alyansang Tapat sa Lasalista (TAPAT) Special Groups The Young Entrepreneurs’ Society of De La Salle University is a local chapter of the Young Entrepreneurs’ Society national organization.

YES serves as a professional organization for Entrepreneurship students of DLSU. It aims to promote the entrepreneurial spirit among business students and every other individual as the economic heroes of today’s trend. The organization aims to empower students and young people by encouraging and promoting entrepreneurship and sharpening their entrepreneurial skills and competencies by providing a comprehensive network of student and business organizations, government institutions, and non-government organizations which can contribute to the cause of the organization. YES also aims to nurture and support young Lasallian entrepreneurs through sponsored seminars, workshops, and other related activities. The Young Entrepreneurs’ Society of De La Salle University (YES-DLSU) serves as a professional organization that caters to Entrepreneurship students with the objective of spearheading activities that shall enhance the skills, abilities, knowledge, and character of entrepreneurship and business students, aspiring entrepreneurs, and those individuals interested towards trends and development in business and industry contributing to the entrepreneurial progress of the community. These are all possible by providing a comprehensive network of student and business organizations, government institutions, and non government organizations through sponsored seminars and workshops among others. Alyansang Tapat sa Lasallista (TAPAT) is the first and leading political organization in De La Salle University, founded on August 16, 1985. Tapat has produced 23 of the 36 University Student Presidents with a total of 7 Executive Board sweeps. Aside from actively participating in USG elections, Tapat focuses on creating pro-student and pro-people leaders who can foster social responsibility. Above all else, Tapat is an alliance of individuals who believe in unity and collective effort and can actualize platforms and programs grounded on good governance in its vision of achieving a just and free society. 224 DLSU Multipurpose Student Cooperative (SCOOP) Lasallian Ambassadors (LAmb) La Salle Debate Society (LSDS) As the first student-owned and operated cooperative in the Philippines, the DLSU Multipurpose Student Cooperative (SCoOp) aims to train its members as future Lasallian business leaders, owners, and entrepreneurs. An organization created by students for the students, SCoOp continues to provide services that are geared towards the needs of the student body. True to its mission of providing quality and cost-efficient services to the students, SCoOp offers a wide variety of services such as daily printing, ring binding, membership cards, tarpaulin printing, A3 and A4 posters, and lamination. The Lasallian Ambassadors is a volunteer organization composed of confident, competent, and talented students who dedicate their service to the university through several support activities that cater to the needs of the freshmen. They are also trained to become model students who exemplify the virtues, values, and character of a true Lasallian. Since its foundation in 1999, the organization has been forming and generating new breeds of skilled and gifted Lasallians whose duty is to strengthen the relations with their clientelle (special guests and visitors of the university, feeder schools, and students) and to offer mentoring support for the freshmen. Founded in 1922 as the La Salle Forensics Team, the La Salle Debate Society is one of the

oldest and most reputable debating institutions in the world. It has hosted and participated in numerous national and international tournaments, continuously achieving and acquiring awards for the university and the Society. It aims to foster growth among its members, raising them with the philosophy of what it means to win with honor and to make the game beautiful. It envisions a world where everyone can engage in intellectual discourse and gives them a platform to speak up. 225 Iisang Tugon sa Tawag ng Panahon (SANTUGON) Lasallian Scholars Society (LSS) Santugon sa Tawag ng Panahon is a premier socio- political party whose core principles rely on the belief in maturity and capacity of the youth in general and the De La Salle University students in particular. We envision a community of politically mature Lasallians who are always consultative, proactive, and responsive to the call of the times. Santugon sa Tawag ng Panahon aims to strengthen the students’ awareness and involvement in socio-political issues. The organization aims to provide the entire student body with holistic activities that promote empowerment and social awareness. We field and train student-leaders for the University Student Government and provide the whole student body with genuine service with the vision of having Empowered Lasallians, and a Progressive Citizenry. This students’ Government shall consult and not merely dictate, involve, and not merely govern. It is the response to the clamor and need for relevant and effective student government. The Lasallian Scholars Society (LSS) is the sole accredited scholars’ organization in De La Salle University-Manila. LSS functions under the Office of Student Leadership, Involvement, Formation, and Empowerment (SLIFE) and considers every scholar as an automatic member of the organization. Serving as DLSU’s premiere scholars’ organization, LSS aims to establish proper representation and identity of Lasallian scholars while providing them an air of familial communion and a level ground for concerns. 226 DE LA SALLE UNIVERSITY CHORALE DE LA SALLE INNERSOUL LASALLIAN YOUTH ORCHESTRA The De La Salle University Chorale was officially established in 1975, initially composed of music-loving Lasallians. For the past years, the group continues to perform and organize relevant activities that brings together choral groups and audiences here and abroad. The premiere chorale group of the university continues to win accolades from prestigious local and international competitions and always delights audiences with their crisp, accurate sound and expressive rendition of songs. It continues to search for and participate as Ambassadors of Goodwill with the willfulness and purposefulness of their commitment in achieving their goal: excellence in choral music. De La Salle Innersoul began as a union of four Kundirana alumni in college, whose passion for singing inspired the founding of a musical group that would soon be the family of many artists in De La Salle University. Launching as a student- artist organization under the Culture and Arts Office in 1997, Innersoul officially became the university’s first pop vocal group. The group has since then diversified its artistry by honing soloists as well as group performers in various

genres of contemporary music, ranging from Pop, Jazz, Dance & Rap, R&B, Liturgical and Gospel Music, and Standard Classics. The Lasallian Youth Orchestra is the official orchestra of De La Salle University that exudes distinctive quality of string, wind and rhythmic instruments, taking form in diverse genres from classical, pop, contemporary to ethnic genres. It dedicates itself to being a globally competitive youth orchestra known for its distinct ethno-symphonic music that showcases the distinct Filipino culture. It is geared towards forming well grounded, service driven creative musicians and artist managers who will be able to effectively communicate the importance of culture and arts in everyday life. The group highlights the capabilities and talents of Lasallian student artists through local and international endeavors and establishes relationships with different schools and companies for future collaborations. Culture and Arts Groups 227 LA SALLE DANCE COMPANY-CONTEMPORARY LA SALLE DANCE COMPANY-FOLK LA SALLE DANCE COMPANY-STREET The La Salle Dance Company-Contemporary started in 1981 as the La Salle Dance Troupe. It boasts itself of being the organizers of the longest-running inter-collegiate dance competition in the region, entitled “Dancelebration”, which started three decades ago. They are fully committed to the promotion of Filipino culture, and the advocacy of contemporary dance as a vessel for cultural realization and pride. They continuously strive to elevate the standards of contemporary dance through experimental pieces using various art forms. In the recent years, they have actively joined festivals and competitions in the ASEAN region and has consistently won accolades for their alma mater. La Salle Dance Company-Folk seeks to become a leading university folk dance company in connecting the youth of De La Salle University to the Filipino heritage by incorporating a modern visual style to the traditional dances of the Philippines. It envisions to establish and to nurture the Filipino identity among its audiences, to create a spark of nationalism and to boost the cultural pride of the Philippines abroad. The group is also committed to advocate the contemporary issues affecting the Filipino indigenous communities and showcases the Filipino traditional values through its dances and moves its audience towards a sense of love for its own culture. Known for its unique and energetic performances, the LSDC-Street is an award-winning crew that aims to establish Filipino identity in hip hop culture through constantly exploring new dance styles and breathtaking acrobatic stunts. They have established their position in the streetdance community as they have ruled over major dance competitions in the country. They have also been consistent placers in the World Hiphop Championships in the US for two consecutive years, and the champion in Body Rock Asia in 2020. 228 DLSU HARLEQUIN THEATRE GUILD DLSU GREEN MEDIA GROUP The DLSU Harlequin Theatre Guild holds the title of being the oldest cultural group established in the university, with its more than sixty years of existence. The Guild advocates social issues and the promotion of Filipino culture in the campus and in other schools. It has also established its name in the culture and

arts scene as it staged several plays by invitation, in legitimate theatres here and abroad, where their talents in production and social advocacy were recognized. In 2018, the Guild’s contribution was immortalized in the recent edition of the CCP Encyclopedia of Philippine Art. The DLSU Green Media Group was formerly known as the Communication Arts Society, which existed as early as 1978. It has established its membership until the late ‘80s and revived in the mid ‘90s. It has also expanded its membership to other colleges, and not only for Communication Arts majors. Today, the Green Media Group is the recognized production and media services arm of the university, composed of dedicated student members who take care of stage management, technical direction, multi-media presentations, graphic designs, scriptwriting, hosting and production design, and coverage services of most university and organizational events. 229 Ang Pahayagang Plaridel Archers Network Green and White Mula noong 1984 hanggang ngayon, nananatili ang Ang Pahayagang Plaridel (APP) bilang publikasyong pangkampus na kritikal at kaisa sa pagpiglas para sa katotohanan, para sa bayan. Sa masikhay na pagsulong ng pitong seksyon nito—Balita, Isports, Bayan, Buhay at Kultura, Retrato, Sining, at Impormasyong Panteknolohiya—layunin ng APP na maghatid ng balita, magpataas ng kamalayan, at magmulat, hindi lamang para sa mga Lasalyano kundi para sa masang Pilipino. Pinanghahawakan ng APP ang mga katagang naging sandigan nito mula sa taong pagkakatatag at paglilingkod sa Pamantasan at sa bayan: Mahirap magbingi-bingihan sa katotohanan. Mahirap magsulat ngunit kinakailangan. Archers Network (ARCH) is the premier online television network organization of De La Salle University-Manila, made for Lasallians, by Lasallians. We serve as a broadcast medium to the Lasallian community through social media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram. We focus on producing relevant, informative, and entertaining content for the Lasallian community. Such contents are classified through different channels such as Advertisements, Entertainment, Events, News and Current Affairs, and Sports and Culture. Founded in 1924 as the first student organization of De La Salle University, Green & White came to be the official yearbook publication of DLSU in 1938. Over 100 years since its inception, Green & White continues the legacy of capturing images of Lasallian excellence and providing the Lasallian community a testimonial of its brilliant history. Student Media Groups 230 Green Giant FM Malate Literary Folio The LaSallian Green Giant FM (GGFM), is the university’s official radio station located at Bro. Bloemen Hall within De La Salle University. Initially a joint venture between TEAMCOMM and ECES, GGFM has since evolved to become part of the Student Media Office. GGFM is a student-run organization that aims to serve the Lasallian community and listeners worldwide by providing entertaining original content as well as broadcasting accurate and reliable news. GGFM also provides services in events hosting, media coverage, voiceovers, and on-air/online promotions. GGFM streams today’s top hits through our official website, as well as releases bi- weekly podcasts on our Facebook Page and Youtube Channels. Malate Literary Folio (MLF) is the official literary and visual arts publication of

De La Salle University. As a publication, Malate commits itself to an excellence in creative writing and visual artistry, guided by a Filipino consciousness. The publication creates folios featuring the works of the staffers from its six sections: Prose, Poetry, Photo, Art, Screenplay, and Marketing & Events. Through its works of art and literature, Malate aims to create a space for honing a critical eye on social issues while sharing new perspectives and solutions about the nation and its people. The LaSallian (TLS), the bastion of issue- oriented critical thinking, is De La Salle University’s official student publication founded in October 24, 1960 with Polo Santiago Pantaleon serving as its first Editor in Chief. As a completely student- run and managed publication, TLS is mainly accountable to the students of the University and serves as a training ground for professional, competent, and responsible journalists. Through its news, stories, photographs, illustrations, and perspectives, TLS represents and fights for the rights and welfare of the students. Represented by a 10-pointed star, TLS and its staffers uphold and live by the 10 pillars of journalism. 231 The Catholic Religious Organizations of Students (CROSs) is a coordinating body of Catholic religious organizations in De La Salle University. The body is under the auspices of the Lasallian Pastoral Office. Its function is to help build Christian communities in the university through various gifts and charisms. It also promotes collaboration, coordination and community building among religious organizations and other student groups in the university. Vision-Mission One Lasallian community carrying the core values of Faith, Zeal for Service, and Communion, empowering the students to be catalysts of social transformation for the glory of God. Religious Organizations CFC–Youth for Christ (YFC) Christ’s Youth in Action (CYA) De La Salle Days with the Lord (DWTL) Couples for Christ–Youth for Christ is the young adult ministry of the Couples for Christ. It is a Catholic evangelistic ministry to young people, with the vision to renew society in Christ through the youth. YFC, through fun friendship, freedom, and faith, aims to be and bring Christ wherever they are. Christ’s Youth in Action is a Catholic movement of young Filipinos dedicated to evangelizing the youth and training leaders for the service of the church. De La Salle Days with the Lord is a youth group that encourages people to start and nurture a personal relationship with Christ. A friendship that allows us to realize and discover what we can contribute to making the world we live in a better place and urges us to reach out and act. We have the DWTL Retreat, a three days, two nights spiritual workshop where one can be introduced to these concepts and afterwards be part of a community that supports each other’s spiritual growth through everyday things. 232 Feast Youth-DLSU Missionary Families of Christ–Youth (MFC Youth) Regnum Christi Love Inspired by Faith and Encounter–Taft (RC LIFE–Taft) Feast Youth-DLSU is part of Feast Youth, under Feast Mega Manila Region. This organization will hold various events and

activities. Feast Youth-DLSU will be working alongside Youth Home Taft, a monthly gathering of senior high and college students among the schools within Taft. Missionary Families of Christ-Youth exists to provide an environment for the youth to honor God through a life of holiness, to empower them to act in humble service, to encourage them to relate in joy with their family, community and the Church, and to testify God’s love. Regnum Christi Love Inspired by Faith and Encounter–Taft is the college youth group of the international Catholic movement Regnum Christi. RC LIFE–Taft is the movement’s first university level program, making it the first of its kind around the globe. As an organization, RC LIFE aims to give the church in the Philippines passionate young professionals for Christ and His mission, inspired by faith and encounter with Christ and others. In DLSU, RC LIFE offers regular activities such as Encounters with Christ, Holy Hours, Faith and Formation Talks, Spiritual Direction and Mission activities. 233 Volunteer Groups Student Care Initiative DLSU – Student Catholic Action (SCA) Student Lasallian Animators The Student Care Initiative (SCI) is the official volunteer student organization under the Office of Student Affairs (OSA). The SCI aims to establish a Lasallian culture of sustainable in-reach welfare and altruistic volunteerism through the pursuit of holistic initiatives and comprehensively integrated service-oriented projects. Through Altruistic Volunteerism, Fostering for Student Welfare, and Concern for the Common Good, the SCI molds a system and avenue for Lasallian student leaders to aid the Lasallian community with meaningful projects, relevant activities, and key partnerships. De La Salle University–Student Catholic Action is an organization focused on action grounded on Catholic virtues. Utilizing the See-Judge-Act methodology, its members are formed according to the realities which the society faces whilst living out a life of spirituality and goodness. The Student Lasallian Animators (SLA) is a community of student-volunteers and under the Lasallian Pastoral Office (LSPO) that help in animating the faith-life of Lasallians through the different activities and programs of Lasallian Pastoral Office (LSPO) and of the organization. The special formation and training SLAs receive while serving their fellow students and the academic community develops them to be effective youth ministers and future leaders. 234 Graduate Student Council DLSU Business Doctoral Society (BDS) DLSU International Law Society (ILS) The Graduate Student Council serves as the representative body of graduate students. They act as activity initiators and represent graduate students in various committees in the University. The Graduate Student Council advocates for the welfare and holistic development of graduate students. The Business Doctoral Society (BDS) of DLSU is a student society composed of graduate students of Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) and PhD in Business. The society’s core purpose is to help Business Doctoral Students of DLSU to finish and graduate from the program within the allowable timeframe set by the University. The society aims to: enhance the members’ personal and professional competencies in business management and research; strengthen the camaraderie and expand network among its members, including DBA

and Ph.D in Business alumni; provide sustainable development and ethical business practice projects for the benefit of the members, the community, and the world we live in; and contribute in promoting and strengthening of the DBA and Ph.D in Business and its network locally and globally. The International Law Society is an organization that is committed to taking the legal profession to another level through activities and programs that will develop and highlight the competencies of law students not only within the college but more especially, in the international sphere. The organization aims to motivate the students to showcase their capabilities in a globally competitive manner, competing against students from local and foreign universities in debate exhibitions and moots, and serving as delegates in various academic fora and seminars. Graduate Student Organizations 235 De La Salle Law Paralegal Volunteers Organization (DLSU LAW PVO) De La Salle University Law Moot and Debate Society (LAMDES) DLSU Optical Society (DOS) It is a service and professional organization that seeks to mold La Salle law students with the guidance and vision of St. John Baptist de La Salle to become active builders and leaders of change. The organization seeks to enrich and supplement the theoretical legal education with real application through trainings, lectureand involvement in communities. The vision of PVO is to assist in building an ideal Lasallian lawyer—one who is in the lead in the improvement of the legal profession. One who seeks to abide by the wisdom of the law and to provide justice and service to those who need it most. It has key advocacies such as Human Rights, Children, Women, Indigenous People, Environment, LGBT, and Labor. LAMDES has a three-point vision: 1. A society that seeks to promote intelligent discourse in various fields of law through mooting and legal debating. 2. A society that aims to perfect or master the art of lawyering through simulated court proceedings. 3. A society that advances the goal of improving the oral and writing skills of law students through oral and written advocacies. It is a recognized graduate student organization of De La Salle University. Committing to DOS means coherent growth of academic advancement, network expansion, and professional development. The organization aims to: promote awareness of optical science and optical engineering among the student and local communities; facilitate communication and interaction between students, faculty, administration and industry professionals; interact with The Optical Society members and its student organizations with a focus on information sharing and networking; and, raise awareness of post-graduation opportunities for students. 236 Environmental Justice Movement (EJM) The Lasallian Graduate Economics Society (LGES) Lasallian Student Ambassadors for Graduate Education (Lasallian SAGE) It is a research and policy-based organization which upholds environmental justice; premised on the right of people to a healthy and balanced ecology and has the end goal of a sustainable environment. The society exists to contribute in sustainably uplifting the human condition through scholarship and performance of students in the Graduate School of Economics. The Society also aims to be

a model organization serving as a framework for other graduate economics organizations to encourage the formation of a national organization of graduate economic organizations The members of The Society commit themselves to embody the following in line with the distinct Lasallian framework o Excellence in the Conduct of Research o World Class Academic Performance o Committed to Scholarship and Communion in Mission The Lasallian SAGE is a graduate student support group of the Office of Student Leadership Involvement, Formation and Empowerment. The Lasallian SAGE was created to help build a rich and supportive community for current graduate students. Lasallian SAGE is committed, confident, and service- oriented DLSU graduate students who come from a variety of disciplines and backgrounds. They have been selected to serve and support new and current students by assisting at graduate student events, local and international functions for graduate studies, and interacting with them in University affairs and in social media. Ambassadors also serve as liaisons between the Office of Student LIFE and the graduate students. Guided by the values of faith, zeal for service, and communion, they are expected to share their time, talent and resources to help in the formation of their fellow Graduate Students and create a community of active, involved, and compassionate Lasallians. 237 APPENDIX G STUDENTS’ CHARTER Section 1: Title. This document shall be known as the Students’ Charter of De La Salle University, with campuses in 2401 Taft Avenue, Manila and in LTI Spine Road, Laguna Blvd, Biñan, Laguna, and shall be referred hereinafter as the Students’ Charter. Chapter I. General Principles 1.1.1 Section 2: Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared that: 1.1.1.1 The Vision-Mission of University is: “De La Salle University is a leading learner- centered research university bridging faith and scholarship, in the service of society especially the poor and marginalized.” 1.1.1.2 The members of the academic community recognize the students’ right to participate actively and effectively in the democratic processes of effectuating progressive and developmental changes with the University. 1.1.2 Guiding Principles. The Students’ Charter hereby declares the following as its basic guiding principles: 1.1.2.1 Lasallian education, being the primary means by which knowledge, skills, and values are imparted to the students, shall be given priority and full attention by all members of the academic community. 1.1.2.2 Student organizations shall develop and enhance democratic processes on campus in line with the Lasallian Vision-Mission Statement. Membership and active participation in student organizations, alliances, and federations which promote and protect student rights and welfare and/ or contribute to national development shall be guaranteed by the University Student Government and the school authorities. 238 1.1.2.3 Student organizations shall not be subjected to rules and regulations that unduly hamper their activities and are prejudicial to their objectives and interests, provided that such objectives are aligned with the University’s mission. 1.1.2.4 The University Student Government (USG), being the supreme and autonomous representative body of the students, shall have the right to participate in the formation of school policies directly affecting the students.

1.1.2.5 Student media shall serve as the principal medium for free and responsible expression, dissemination of information, and interaction among the different sectors of the academic community. 1.1.2.6 With their democratic rights guaranteed, students shall serve as a potent and cogent force in the country’s nationalist social transformation. Section 4: Definition of Terms. 1.1.2.7 Lasallian Community - A community composed of the students, faculty, non-teaching staff, and the University Administration. 1.1.2.8 Alternative Classes - Classes given by the professor which are outside of classroom such as plays, field trips, etc 1.1.2.9 Board of Trustees - The overall governing body of De La Salle University, which oversees the long-term plans for improvements in the university’s academic programs, research activities, and facilities. 1.1.2.10 Campus - The grounds and buildings covering the De La Salle University - Manila and Laguna Campus. 239 1.1.2.11 College/School Government – A representative body composed of students elected by their constituents to fulfill specific duties and responsibilities in the student government. 1.1.2.12 Council of University Representatives - Internal and external committees wherein University Student Government officers are given the task of representing the student body 1.1.2.13 Courses, Academic and Non-Academic - Classes about a particular subject taught during the student’s entire academic stay in the university. 1.1.2.14 Dean of Student Affairs - The individual responsible for the direct coordination and integration of a comprehensive program for the Student Affairs adopted by the University and administered in its several colleges 1.1.2.15 Degree Program or Program - A course of study leading to an academic degree. 1.1.2.16 Fourth-Hour Activity - Class activities such as, but not limited to, activities organized by the University Student Government, Council of Student Organizations, special groups and other University offices, that are done outside of class hours. 1.1.2.17 Free Electives – Subjects outside an undergraduate student’s base degree program which students may avail of, provided that the University’s policy on free electives is followed. 1.1.2.18 Make-up Classes - Compensates for a regular class that did not take place due to reasons such as bad weather, unavailability of professors, etc. 240 1.1.2.19 Minor Degree Program - a 12-unit (or more) program outside an undergraduate student’s base degree program which may be availed, provided that the University’s policy on Minor Degree Programs is followed. 1.1.2.20 Multi-sectoral Committee - A committee composed of representatives from different sectors of the university that discusses different specific university concerns. 1.1.2.21 Pertinent Documents - Documents that are relevant or related to a specific matter at hand which are given upon the request of a student. 1.1.2.22 Special Classes - Classes which are granted upon by the Department Chair and College Associate Dean upon the special request of students. 1.1.2.23 Student Discipline Formation Board - The body which handles all student disciplinary cases and is composed of a faculty member, a student, an administrator, and a chairperson who must be a member of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines. 1.1.2.24 Separation – means students who have graduated from the university or completed their

degree. Chapter II. Admission and Separation 1.1.3 Section 5: Admission. Subject to fair, reasonable, and equitable admission requirements, no student shall be denied admission on account of their physical handicap, socio-economic status, political or religious beliefs or membership in student organizations nor shall pregnant, married students, and reformed drug users be discriminated against. A student shall have the right to freely choose their field of study subject to existing academic policy and curricula and to continue their course up to graduation except in cases of academic deficiency or violation of disciplinary regulations which do not infringe upon the exercise of student rights. 241 1.1.4 Shifting. Students have the right to shift based on objective criteria as evaluation of acceptance into the degree program subject to the processes of academic departments. Furthermore, students have the right to know the rationale of their final assessment upon inquiry. 1.1.5 Separation. Students have the right to be provided with a standard set of pertinent documents (Transcript of Records, Certificate of Good Moral Conduct, Diploma, and Certificate of Graduation when applicable) upon separation from the university as long as the student is cleared from any obligation with the institution. Chapter III. Responsibilities of Students 1.1.6 Section 6: All students shall have the following responsibilities: 1.1.6.1 To develop their potentials to the utmost in order that they may be of service to their families and society; 1.1.6.2 To develop their potentials to the utmost in order that they may be of service to their families and society; 1.1.6.3 To exert utmost efforts towards the realization of harmonious relationships with the rest of the academic community; 1.1.6.4 To participate actively in school activities including athletics and civic affairs for the development of the community and the nation; 1.1.6.5 To uphold, preserve, and maintain the good name of their alma mater; and 1.1.6.6 To exercise their rights responsibly. Chapter IV. Academic Rights 1.1.7 Section 7: Unpaid Tuition and Balances. No student shall be prohibited from taking a periodic or final examination because of unpaid balances of tuition and fees and under the established terms prescribed by the University and approved by the appropriate 242 educational agency. Students with delinquent accounts permitted to take an examination shall nevertheless be subject to the right of the University to withhold the release or issuance of such students’ school records or documents or to deny such students from admission for the next trimester or year until all unpaid accounts are settled fully. 1.1.8 Section 8: Dropping of Courses. A student has the right to drop courses where “all financial transactions should be made through the Finance and Accounting Office at the Student Services window”, as stipulated in the Student Handbook. 1.1.9 Section 9: Honors and Privileges. A student who excels academically shall be given recognition through trimestral honors and graduation honors. Students who enter the Dean’s First Honors List are entitled to receive the Jose Rizal Certificate. If they have consistently performed for six consecutive trimesters, they will be recognized on the

Annual Academic Recognition Day. In addition, they are given the privilege of unlimited cuts or absences in their academic courses provided that they will not fail to meet the academic requirements expected of them from any classes. Other special awards may be given to graduating students who are nominated by any student, faculty, and administration to the University Honors and Awards Council. 1.1.10 Section 10: Academic Evaluation. Students have the right to know at the start of the trimester how they will be evaluated through their enrolled course’s syllabus which are presented to and verified by the Chairperson of the Department Students may clarify and appeal to the Department on the standards and process of how they are evaluated. 1.1.11 Section 11: Class Standing. Students have the right to be informed by their professors of their class standing not later than two weeks following their midterm examinations. They also have the right to see their graded quizzes and other works, which will have bearing on their grades, before the final examinations. 1.1.12 Section 12: Consultation. Students have the right to be given proper consultation by their professors. This 243 includes but is not limited to consultation hours with their respective professors and academic advisers upon mutual agreement. 1.1.13 Section 15: Computation of Grades. Students have the right to see their duly corrected final examination papers and the computation of their final grades during Grade Consultation day or on a day agreed upon by the professor and the students. The departments must ensure that the professors will be present to provide a venue for the students to voice out their concerns. Students are then entitled to an ample duration of time to consult with the professor. 1.1.14 Section 13: Curriculum and Faculty. Students shall have the right to give their opinion and evaluate their curriculum and the list of faculty members, both during hiring and current, to their respective departments. 1.1.15 Section 14: Attendance. All students are expected to attend class promptly and regularly. A student may incur absences, provided that they do not exceed the number of allowable absences and the absences are reasonable. A student shall not be considered absent in class when the teacher arrives after one-third of the class time. 1.1.16 Section 15: Make Up and Alternative Classes. In the case of alternative or make-up classes, students and professors should reach a consensus as stipulated in the Department Operations Manual. 1.1.17 Section 16: Credit and Grading. Students who wish to petition for a change of a trimestral grade shall ask their instructors concerned to fill out the necessary forms and to comply with the procedures for the change of grade. Students are informed of the change of grade through their official DLSU email. Same information is sent to the University Registrar and the Faculty concerned. Students are entitled to clarify the reason for the change of grade. 1.1.18 Section 17: In Cases of Force Majeure. In the event a catastrophe hinders face to face classes, students are

guaranteed the right to recommend and negotiate necessary adjustments to academic and classroom 244 policies to accommodate the immediate needs of students. 1.1 Fees and Financing 1.1.1 Section 18: Tuition and Fees. Students have the right to be properly represented in all meetings relevant to the discussion of tuition and fees increase. They have the right to be provided a summary report of the usage or allocation of the previous academic year’s increase. 1.1.2 Section 19: Scholarships. Deserving students have the right to avail of scholarships offered by the University through the Office of Admissions and Scholarships (OAS). 1.1.3 Section 20: Other Forms of Financing. Qualified students have the right to avail of loans, take positions for part-time work within the University (such as assistantship under academic departments), promissory notes, scholarships, financial grants, and the like, for the purposes of financing their education. 1.1.4 Section 21: Other Forms of Financing. Qualified students have the right to avail of loans, take positions for part-time work within the University (such as assistantship under academic departments), promissory notes, scholarships, financial grants, and the like, for the purposes of financing their education. 1.1.5 Section 22: Refund. Students have the right to a refund, according to the memorandum of the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (now known as the Department of Education). When a student registers in the University, it is understood that they are enrolling for the entire term. A student who transfers or otherwise withdraws in writing within two weeks after the beginning of classes and who has already paid the pertinent tuition and other school fees in full for any length longer than one month may be charged ten percent (10%) of the total amount due for the term if they withdraw during the first week of classes, or twenty percent (20%) if within the second week of classes, regardless of whether or not they actually attended classes. The student may be charged all the fees in full if they withdraw anytime after the second week of classes. 245 Chapter VI. Right to Proper Information 1.1.6 Section 23: Fees and Payment. Tuition, special fees, and deadlines for payments of such must be posted on the administrative bulletin boards, Help Desk Announcements, and other communication channels prior to and during the enrollment period. 1.1.7 Section 24: Academic Evaluation. Students have the right to access pertinent information regarding their enrolled courses such as minor and major course requirements, assessment rubrics, syllabus, class standing, and other documents used by the faculty and the administration in their respective operations provided that it is not illicit in nature as confirmed confidential by their Department Chair and/or College Dean. 1.1.8 Section 25: Academic Consultations. The University strongly urges the community to cultivate a learner- centered environment wherein student-teacher dialogue regarding course delivery is exercised at all times. This also includes the right of students to discuss their class standing and computation of grades in their enrolled courses. 1.1.9 Section 26: Approval and Accumulated Absences. Students have the

right to information regarding the approval of and/or accumulated absences. A student who has acquired the number of absences that may render them ineligible for a passing grade shall be informed by the instructor through direct communication (consultation, verbal warning or letter/ note). Students, however, must be responsible in monitoring their attendance as well. 1.1.10 Section 27: Final Examinations. At the beginning of the course, students have the right to be informed of their instructors’ policies for final examinations and the criteria for exemptions. Students have the right to be informed of the final examination schedules two weeks before the start of the examinations through class discussions, administrative bulletin boards, and AnimoSpace. 1.1.11 Section 28: Use of Data Gathered in USG Surveys. Use 246 of Data Gathered in USG Surveys. Students have the right to know the purpose and the specific use of their gathered data through University Student Government surveys, such as, but not limited to, the Student Census, Constituency Checks, and Student Services . This shall be provided in the USG’s Privacy Policy. Chapter VII. Right to Representation and Suffrage. 1.1.12 Section 29: University Student Government. The University shall ensure the democratic and autonomous existence of the University Student Government (USG). This body shall have its own set of officers chosen by the students during annual general and frosh elections. The USG shall have the right to determine its policies and programs on student activities subject to its duly ratified constitution and policies. 1.1.13 Section 30: Formation of the Commission on Elections (COMELEC). The Commission on Elections shall conduct and oversee the election of officers of the University Student Government. The College Presidents will have the responsibility appointing COMELEC Commissioners from their respective colleges for the approval of the Legislative Assembly. The COMELEC shall be under the USG, which shall provide the COMELEC sufficient funds to ensure the success of its goals and objectives. Once constituted, the COMELEC shall ensure the conduct of clean, honest, and peaceful elections. 1.1.14 Section 31: Right to Representation. The University shall recognize the right of students to be represented, through the USG, in all policymaking bodies and multi- sectoral committees handling issues that affect them. Examples are the following: 1.1.14.1 Ad-Hoc Grievance Board 1.1.14.2 Aspiring Organizations Accreditation Committee 1.1.14.3 Canteen Inspection Committee 1.1.14.4 Committee on National Issues and Concerns 247 1.1.14.5 College Council 1.1.14.6 Council on Inclusion, Diversity, and Well- Being 1.1.14.7 Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee 1.1.14.8 Drug Testing Selection Board 1.1.14.9 Enrollment Council 1.1.14.10 Housing Committee 1.1.14.11 Multi-Sectoral Consultative Committee on Tuition and Fees 1.1.14.12 Student Discipline Formation Board 1.1.14.13 Student Fees Revision Committee 1.1.14.14 Student Handbook Revision Committee 1.1.14.15 Task Force Safe School Committee 1.1.14.16 University Honors and Awards Council 1.1.14.17 University Library Council 1.1.14.18 University Panel for Case Conference 1.1.14.19 University Vision Mission Week Executive Committee 1.1.15 Section 32: Board of Trustees. The USG, on behalf of the students, can meet with the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees every trimester to discuss pertinent University issues. In

addition, the USG shall have access to the minutes of the meetings of the Board of Trustees. 1.1.16 Section 33: Administrative Councils. The USG, on behalf of the students, have the right to request consultation meetings with the University’s Administrative Councils to discuss pertinent University issues or when the need arises. 1.1.17 Section 34: Hiring of Incoming Faculty Members. Students have the right to quality Lasallian education. They, through their professional organizations under 248 the Council of Student Organizations and their respective College Student Government officers, shall have the right to coordinate with their respective departments for purposes of participating in the screening of incoming teachers/professors. 1.1.18 Section 35: Evaluation of Faculty Members. Students have the right to evaluate their teachers during the term. Chapter VIII. Right to Organize 1.1.19 Section 36: Right to Organization. Unity and collective effort being fundamental to the realization of common goals and the promotion and protection of common interests, the University recognizes the right of students to organize among themselves. The right of the students to form, assist, or join any university or external organizations, alliance, or federation for their physical, intellectual, moral, cultural, civic, spiritual, and/ or political interest, so long as these are not contrary to the University’s mission and Lasallian core values, shall not be abridged. 1.1.20 Section 37: Council of Student Organizations. The university shall recognize the Council of Student Organizations as an independent and autonomous student sector. This body reserves the right to re- accredit organizations every academic year. CSO shall have the right to organize and provide student activities based on its nature, constitution, and need of the Council. CSO shall represent the different professional, special interest, and socio-civic organizations in the university. 1.1.21 Section 37: Accreditation and Granting of Privileges to Student Organizations. No unreasonable requirements shall be imposed on student organizations seeking recognition. Any group of fifteen (15) students may apply for accreditation of their organization beginning the second trimester. Please see Section 15.3 Student Activities under Specific Provisions for Undergraduate Students. A duplicate of these documents must be submitted to the Council of Student Organizations. The Council of Student Organizations, USG and the Office of Student LIFE under the Dean of Student 249 Affairs shall take charge of the accreditation of student organizations. Excessive charges for the use of school facilities shall be prohibited. Whenever possible, the University Administration shall allow student organizations to use school facilities free of charge. 1.1.22 Section 38: Safe Spaces within Student Organizations. The University recognizes each student’s right to democratically participate in student organizations, alliances, and federations provided that these do not contradict the University’s vision, mission, and Lasallian values, as well as the state’s governing laws. As such, all students are encouraged to exercise due diligence and utmost responsibility when democratically participating in organizations, alliances, and federations and in partaking in student activities, provided that no actions result in the contradiction of the University’s vision and mission, as well as the state’s governing laws. Chapter IX. Right to

Adequate and Safe Campus Facilities and Services 1.1.23 Section 39: Adequate Facilities and Services. Students have the right to adequate facilities and efficient services provided by the University. These shall aid the overall development of the members of the Lasallian community through well-equipped venues and well- maintained equipment. 1.1.24 Section 40: Safe Campus. Students, like any other member of the University, have the right to have a safe campus. Thus, the facilities and venues present in the campus shall have periodical evaluation and maintenance, the period of which shall be disclosed appropriately to the community. 1.1.25 Section 41: Access to Safe Spaces and Adequate Mental Health Services. Pursuant to the University Policies on Safe Spaces and Mental Health, students are guaranteed access to University services and support in fulfillment of their right to safe spaces and adequate mental health services. 1.1.26 Section 42: Right to Equal Access. The University acknowledges the right of the students to equal access 250 and maximized use of available campus space and facilities. Benches, tables, swimming pools, basketball courts, etc. in campus meant for students shall be accessible to all who wish to use them on a principle of right by physical presence unless reserved beforehand with the use of a venue reservation ticket. 1.1.27 Section 43: Prohibition against Militarization of the Campus. The pursuit of academic excellence and exercise of academic freedom can be attained only in an atmosphere free from fear and unreasonable restraint. Pursuant thereto, no military detachments shall be installed in the campus. Military elements and/ or policemen in uniform or in plain clothes and school security forces shall not interfere with the student activities, particularly peaceful mass actions inside the school campus. School officials may, however, request their presence in cases where there is disruption of normal school operations. Chapter X. Right to Freedom of Expression and Opinion 1.1.27.1 Section 44: Right to Freedom of Expression and Opinion. Students have the right to freedom of expression and opinion provided that these are not contrary to the University’s character as a Lasallian institution and its Vision-Mission. The students and University- recognized student organizations have the right to: 1.1.27.1.1 To freedom of responsible expression, with respect to the rights of others; 1.1.27.1.2 To state their concerns on matters related to the quality of their education; 1.1.27.1.3 To dress according to their individual tastes in a manner that does not infringe upon their ability to express their personality, self-identity, advocacy, spirituality or religion, among other things; 251 1.1.27.1.4 To file grievance against any member of the Lasallian community following the guidelines stipulated in the Student Handbook; 1.1.27.1.5 To free press, according to Republic Act 7079; 1.1.27.1.6 To freely declare their sexual orientation and choose their gender identity without fear of discrimination; and 1.1.27.1.7 To give stands on political issues and engage in political activities provided that the student/ organization shall not speak on behalf of the University nor use any University/resource for any political activity. Any violation of the rights stipulated above may

be raised to the USG or Grievance Committee following the existing policies and procedures. 1.1.27.2 Section 45: Consumer Rights. The university recognizes that each student possesses basic consumer rights. Each student has the right to be provided by the university with goods and services with reasonable pricing and good quality. Students have the right to be given complete and truthful information to make informed and intelligent product choices. Students have the right to voice out their complaints and concerns regarding current market dynamics. Chapter XI. Right to Due Process in Disciplinary Proceedings 1.1.28 Section 46: Right to Due Process in Airing Grievances. Students of De La Salle University are given the right to air their grievance against any member of the academic community. Grievances are best settled through sincere dialogue and discussion between the parties to a grievance, befitting a Lasallian academic 252 community. Formal grievances may be pursued only as a last resort. The procedures in handling grievances are outlined in this section. For assistance, students are encouraged to drop by the University Student Government (USG) Office located at Room 303, Br. Gabriel Connon FSC Hall. 1.1.29 Section 47: Student Complaints & Grievances. Students of De La Salle University have the right to air their complaints and/or grievances against any member of the Lasallian Community academic community. Grievances are best settled through sincere dialogue and discussion between the parties to a grievance, befitting a Lasallian academic community. Formal grievance may be pursued only as a last resort after efforts for informal complaints and mediation have been exhausted through student- teacher dialogues. The procedures in handling informal complaints and formal grievances are outlined in this section. For assistance, students are encouraged to reach out to the University Student Government (for undergraduate students) or the Graduate Student Council (for graduate students). The rest of the Student Complaints & Grievances provisions can be found in Section 7 of this handbook. 253 APPENDIX H DLSU MENTAL HEALTH POLICY De La Salle University (DLSU) is a Catholic educational institution that prioritizes and adds a premium to the mental health and well-being of students and employees by protecting their rights and ensuring a safe and healthy learning and working environment designed to promote a vibrant educational and professional community. Adhering to the Mental Health Act of the Philippines, DLSU endeavors to maintain a caring community working together to achieve an inclusive environment free of stigma and discrimination by promoting mental health, protecting the basic rights of students and employees with mental health conditions, providing responsive programs, policies and practices and facilitating access to mental health care services. LSU strives for excellence in providing information and raising awareness and management skills to improve the mental health of students and employees and capacitate the community with preventive and proactive approaches. DLSU ensures a supportive culture, offering assistance to students and employees needing mental health services. It also adheres to the protection of rights against discrimination and abuse, as well as their right to privacy. Lasallian Core Principles

• De La Salle University, as a Lasallian Institution, values the dignity of persons and engages its members in nurturing relationships built on respect. It promotes diversity, recognizing the unique abilities of every member. • As it pursues the Lasallian Mission, De La Salle University maintains an inclusive community where members adhere to the principles of “together and by association” and “no one left behind” as they work together with greater understanding and acceptance of one another. • Guiding Principles • Lasallian education is a mission and ministry directed towards the integral human and Christian development of persons; • DLSU as a Lasallian school commits to its identity as an educational community that works towards the holistic development of learners in all their uniqueness and diversity; 254 • De La Salle University provides an environment that promotes the safety and well-being of all members of the community, including those who have mental health conditions and all the people around them; • Mental well-being is a health issue; • De La Salle University takes a proactive preventive approach to health. Governing Laws and Regulations • Republic Act 11036 (Mental Health Act), June 20, 2018 • Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Mental Health Act, January 22, 2019 • DOLE Department Order 208, series of 2020, February 11, 2020 General Policies on Mental Health • De La Salle University shall take a proactive holistic stance to the promotion of physical and mental well-being of its community members, and the protection of the basic rights of all members of the community, free from discrimination and stigmatization. it shall provide programs, processes, procedures, and support services that favors early preventive intervention; • De La Salle University shall have an integrated approach to health and well-being covering physical, psychosocial, psychiatric, and neurological aspects; • De La Salle University shall integrate mental health in the relevant policies and procedures of the University, including but not limited to employment, student admission, student retention, discipline formation, grievance, performance evaluation; • Courses of action shall consider significant issues affecting physical, psychological, and social health of both those afflicted with mental health conditions, as well as those who may be adversely affected by their actions. Specifically, the University shall provide responses to persons who experience violence, abuse, and neglect; help prevent or reduce the effects of violence; provide information, counselling, medical treatment, forensic, examination and support services for anyone with mental health conditions, as well as those who have been adversely affected or been attacked by individuals with mental health conditions particularly within the workplace and in educational settings. 255 • De La Salle University shall maintain and protect the confidentiality of all information regarding the mental health of all individual members of the community; Basic Rights of Service Users (from Republic Act 11036) • Freedom from social, economic, and political discrimination and stigmatization, whether committed by public or private actors; • Exercise all inherent civil, political, economic, social, religious, educational, and cultural rights, respecting individual qualities, abilities, and diversity

of background, without discrimination on the basis of physical disability, age, gender, sexual orientation, race, color, language, religion or nationality, ethnic, or social origin; • Access to evidence-based treatment of the same standard and quality, regardless of age, sex, socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity or sexual orientations; • Access to affordable essential health and social services for the purpose of achieving the highest attainable standard of mental health; • Access to mental health services at all levels of the national health care system; • Access to comprehensive and coordinated treatment integrating holistic prevention, promotion, rehabilitation, care, and support, aimed at addressing mental health care needs through a multi- disciplinary, user-driven treatment, and recovery plan; • Access to psychosocial care and clinical treatment in the least restrictive environment and manner; • Humane treatment free from solitary confinement, torture, and other forms of cruel, inhumane, harmful or degrading treatment and invasive procedures not backed by scientific evidence. • Access to aftercare and rehabilitation when possible in the community for the purpose of social reintegration and inclusion; • Access to adequate information regarding available multidisciplinary mental health services; • Participate in mental health advocacy, policy planning, legislation, service provision, monitoring, research, and evaluation; • Confidentiality of all information, communications, and records, in whatever form or medium stored, regarding the service user, any 256 aspect of the service user’s mental health, or any treatment or care received by the service user, which information, communications, and records shall not be disclosed to third parties without the written consent of the service user concerned or the service user’s legal representative, except in the following circumstances: • Disclosure is required by law or pursuant to an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction; • The service user has expressed consent to the disclosure; • A life-threatening emergency exists and such disclosure is necessary to prevent harm or injury to the service user or to other persons; • The service user is a minor and the attending mental health professional reasonably believes that the service user is a victim of child abuse; or • Disclosure is required in connection with an administrative, civil, or criminal case against a mental health professional or worker for negligence or a breach of professional ethics, to the extent necessary to completely adjudicate, settle or resolve any issue or controversy involved therein; • Give informed consent before receiving treatment or care, including the right to withdraw such consent. Such consent shall be recorded in the service user’s clinical record. • Participate in the development and formulation of the psychosocial care or clinical treatment plan to be implemented; • Designate or appoint a person of legal age to act as his or her legal representative in accordance with this Act, except in cases of impairment or temporary loss of decision-making capacity; • Send or receive uncensored private communication which may include communication by letter, telephone or electronic means, and receive visitors at reasonable times, including the service user’s legal representative and representatives from the

Commission of Human Rights (CHR); • Legal services, through competent counsel of the service user’s choice. In case the service user cannot afford the services of a counsel, the Public Attorney’s Office, or a legal aid institution of the service user or representative’s choice, shall assist the service user; 257 • Access to their clinical records unless, in the opinion of the attending mental health professional, revealing such information would cause harm to the service user’s health or put the safety of others at risk. When any such clinical records are withheld, the service user or his or her legal representative may contest such decision with the internal review board created pursuant to this Act authorized to investigate and resolve disputes, or with the CHR; • Information, within twenty-four (24) hours of admission to a mental health facility, of the rights enumerated in this section in a form and language understood by the service user; and • By oneself or through a legal representative, to file with the appropriate agency, complaints of improprieties, abuses in mental health care, violations of rights of persons with mental health needs, and seek to initiate appropriate investigation and action against those who authorized illegal or unlawful involuntary treatment or confinement, and other violations. 258 APPENDIX I DLSU SAFE SPACES POLICY AND PROGRAM I. Statement of Legal Compliance In accordance with the Republic Act No. 11313 to be known as the Safe Spaces Act or “AN ACT DEFINING GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN STREETS, PUBLIC SPACES, ONLINE, WORKPLACES, AND EDUCATIONAL OR TRAINING INSTITUTIONS, PROVIDING PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES THEREFORE” enacted on April 17, 2019 to address existing gaps and issues on equality, security, and safety of both women and men in private and public spaces; and its Implementing Rules and Regulations pursuant to Section 38 of R.A. 11313 approved on October 28, 2019. The Safe Spaces Act is intended to expand the scope of the Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995 or Republic Act No. 7877. The University hereby adopts the following policy on full promotion of the value and dignity of every human person and guarantee full respect for human rights; recognize the role of women in nation-building and ensure the fundamental equality, security, and safety not only in private but also on the streets, public spaces, online, workplaces and educational and training institutions. II. Declaration of University Safe Spaces Policy (Purpose) The Guiding Principles of the Philippine Lasallian Family define the kind of the Lasallian presence and mission in the country today. As provided by the Lasallian tradition, there are three elements that enable our participation. These elements, taken together as one dynamic unity, provide a way of integrating and expressing every Lasallian’s vocation: The spirit of faith allows one to discover God’s active presence in his word, in members of the community, in the poor, in nature, in history, and in ourselves; zeal for the integral salvation of all allows one to actively express their faith in gospel witness and service. It is

enthusiastically giving of oneself that involves preferential concern for the poor and the vulnerable; communion in mission, mission as communion allows one to work in solidarity and collaborations as a way of accomplishing the mission. Our response to the call is to be in association with the mission and articulate (1) faith in the presence of God (2) respect for all persons (3) inclusive community (4) quality education and (5) concern for the poor and vulnerable (Our Lasallian Tradition, 2020). 259 The Lasallian Guiding Principles defined the Poor and the vulnerable as: “All those deprived of the means to realize their dignity as persons. In a broader sense, these are men, women and children who suffer from various forms of “poverty as frustration,” the impoverishment born of injustice, physical and social evils, personal insufficiency, and failure” DLSU as a Community of Faith and Zeal. We are guided by the life of the Gospel emphasizing the inalienable dignity of each person and striving to develop authentic personal relationships through trust and mutual respect. As a tertiary school, we seek to serve and embrace each member of the community with varied needs and diverse personal, social, and cultural backgrounds and do so, in providing accommodations which are committed to living the Lasallian mission. DLSU, as an institution that facilitates personal and social development, adheres to the mandates of the Philippine Laws to lift the dignity, respect, and raise the awareness of its members of their rights within and beyond the bounds of the university, specifically the observance of the Safe Spaces Act that ensures the preservation of human dignity and assures people of their rights. Faithful to its mission as a Lasallian institution, we see the importance of a policy to enable us to bring this agenda at the institutional level, where conversations, policies, structures, programs, and support are provided to those who need them. III. Scope This policy puts the implementation of Safe Spaces Act in the context of the University community, and integrates provisions in the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) memo on gender and development. It governs all members of the Lasallian community composed of students, faculty members, administration and non-teaching personnel, regardless of a person’s gender, gender identity, gender expression, sex, age, race, or nationality. This policy covers all that occurs on any University campus or in connection with University programs or activities including those in a virtual environment. The University hereby amends, as prescribed in the Implementing Rules and Procedures of Republic Act No. 11313 or the Safe Spaces Act of 2018 and the Policies and Guidelines for the Prevention and Investigation of Sexual Harassment Cases, established pursuant to Republic Act No. 7877, or the Anti- Sexual Harassment Act of 1995. 260 IV. Definition of Terms As provided in the Safe Spaces Act and the DLSU manuals and handbook, the following are hereby defined as: 1.1 Student refers to those enrolled in any subject or course in the University, regardless of the number of units enrolled, those

included in the official student list of the Office of Registrar (OUR) and Office of Academic Services for Integrated School (OASIS), whether enrolled, on official leave of absence (LOA), on residency, or absence without leave (AWOL); and those allowed to graduate from the University and Integrated School (IS) but has not yet secured the required clearances from the University; 1.2 Employee refers to a person, who in exchange for remuneration, agrees to perform specified services for another person, who exercises fundamental control over the work regardless of the term or duration of agreement. As provided in the RA11313 Safe Space Act, that for the purposes of the law and these rules, a person who is detailed to an entity under a subcontracting or secondment agreement shall be considered an employee. 1.3 Employer refers to those who exercise control over the employee. For DLSU, employer pertains to the following: 1.3.1 Board of Trustees 1.3.2 Central administration or university administration refers to those employed by the University for supervisory positions or those that have been appointed to oversee academic programs, support services, and other operations units. 1.4 University Student Government and Graduate Student Council refer to the supreme and autonomous representative body of the students, undergraduate and graduate respectively. 1.5 DLSU Integrated School Student Council refers to the autonomous representative of the Integrated School student body from Preschool to Grade 12. This term collectively includes both Student Councils for Laguna and Senior High School Manila. 1.6 Catcalling refers to unwanted remarks directed towards a person, commonly done in the form of wolf-whistling and misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs. 1.7 Cyberstalking is a form of stalking that is committed through an electronic medium in which online communication takes place. 261 1.8 Gender refers to a set of socially ascribed characteristics, norms, roles, attitudes, values, and expectations identifying the social behavior of men and women, and the relations between them. 1.9 Gender-based online sexual harassment refers to an online conduct targeted at a particular person that causes or likely to cause another mental, emotional or psychological distress, and fear of personal safety, sexual harassment acts including unwanted sexual remarks and comments, threats, uploading or sharing of one’s photos without consent, video and audio recordings, cyberstalking, and online identity theft. 1.10 Gender identity and/or expression refers to the personal sense of identity as characterized, among others, by manner of clothing, inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions. A person may have a male or female identity with physiological characteristics of the opposite sex, or may have been assigned a particular sex at birth but who identifies with the opposite sex, or may have an identity that does not correspond to one’s sex assigned at birth or to one’s primary or secondary sex characteristics, in which case this person is considered transgender. 1.11 Homophobic remarks or slurs are any statements in whatever form or however delivered, which are indicative of fear, hatred or aversion towards persons who are perceived to be or

actually identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, queer, pansexual, and such other persons of diverse sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or towards any person perceived to or actually have experienced same-sex attraction. 1.12 Information and communication system refers to a system for generating, sending, receiving, storing or otherwise processing electronic data messages or electronic documents and includes the computer system or other similar devices by or in which data are recorded or stored and any procedure related to the recording or storage of electronic data messages or electronic documents. 1.13 Information and communications technology or ICT shall mean the totality of electronic means to access, create, collect, store, process, receive, transmit, present, and disseminate information. 1.14 Misogynistic remarks or slurs are any statements in whatever form or however delivered, that are indicative of the feeling of hating women or the belief that men are inherently better than women. 262 1.15 Sexist remarks or slurs are statements in whatever form or however delivered, that are indicative of prejudice, stereotyping, or discrimination on the basis of sex, typically against women. 1.16 Transphobic remarks or slurs are any statements in whatever form or however delivered, that are indicative of fear, hatred or aversion towards persons whose gender identity and/or expression do not conform with their sex assigned at birth. 1.17 Stalking refers to conduct directed at a person involving the repeated visual or physical proximity, non-consensual communication, or a combination thereof that cause or will likely cause a person to fear for one’s own safety or the safety of others, or to suffer emotional distress. V. Policy Statement De La Salle University recognizes its role in assuring the holistic development of the individual through collaborative and capacitating engagements. In greater recognition of this role, the University maintains integrity in service of the Lasallian community, upholds the rights and dignity of every individual, and guarantees full respect for human rights. De La Salle University believes that all individuals should be treated equally. It welcomes learners, educators, and support staff from all backgrounds. It is committed to creating and maintaining an inclusive learning environment, recognizing and respecting diverse perspectives in all issues. It looks upon difference and plurality as sources of creativity, personal, and communal enrichment, as well as encouraging grounds for the practice of mindfulness. It supports all kinds of engagement that furthers understanding and appreciation of different ways of being in the world. In light of this, De La Salle University therefore fights all forms of sexual harassment, and promotes a harassment- and violence-free environment-- both physical and virtual--for all, and shall take effective measures to foster a safe space for all. • The University further affirms that every member of the Lasallian community, enjoys and is assured of: • Right to a community free of harassment • Right as a survivor, to report inappropriate conduct without retaliation or repercussions • Right as a witness or confidant, to report inappropriate conduct without retaliation or repercussions • Right as a respondent, to due process

and appropriate hearing procedures 263 • Right to a quick and thorough investigation that shall observe confidentiality and respect for privacy • Right to seek help, both for mental or physical health Further, it commits itself in ensuring that the following are responded to: • Gender responsive curriculum through mainstreaming strategies, including research activities, • Periodic audit of policies, guidelines, structures and mechanisms to support gender equality and safe spaces, • Training and development support for faculty and partners in the implementation of related programs, and • Integration of relevant programs in the institutional plans. VI. Communication of this Policy • Every member of DLSU shall familiarize themselves with this policy. • DLSU will highlight this policy through: • consciousness-raising campaigns, including the posting of the University Policy and other relevant materials in public spaces on campus, and releasing of information through HDAs. • holding training sessions, especially to the members of the pool for CODI • free seminars/webinars on the Safe Spaces Act and the DLSU Safe Spaces Policy • including a discussion of the Safe Spaces Act and the DLSU Safe Spaces Policy in GENDERS and related courses • creating discussion forums on Gender and Gender- related issues. • making the anti-sexual harassment orientation and clearance a component of the student curriculum, personnel related actions, such as hiring, tenure and promotion, and accreditation of service contractors, and partner entity engagements. VII. Sexual Harassment and Discrimination A. Sexual harassment Defined: any unwanted, unwelcome, uninvited sexual advances, request for sexual favour, verbal or physical conduct or gesture of a sexual nature, or any other behaviour of a sexual nature, or 264 any offensive remarks about a person’s sex, sexual orientation, gender expression, or gender identity that might reasonably be expected or be perceived to cause offence or humiliation to another, when such conduct interferes with work, is made a condition of employment or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment. While typically involving a pattern of behaviour, it can take the form of a single incident. Sexual harassment may occur between persons of the opposite or same sex. Both males and females can be either the survivors or the offenders. B. Discrimination Defined: refers to any distinction, exclusion or restriction which has the purpose or effect of nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil, or any other field. VIII. Acts of Sexual Harassment and Other Sexual Offenses: Acts of sexual harassment and discrimination, as defined in RA 11313, are classified as light, less grave, and grave offenses, which are as follows: 1.1 Light Offenses shall include, but are not limited to: 1.17.1 Unwanted remarks with sexual overtones; 1.17.2 Unwelcome sexual innuendos which may be in the form of statements, questions, or jokes; 1.17.3 Repeated unwanted comments on one’s appearance that may degrade, humiliate, insult, or offend the receiver/s; 1.17.4 Covert glances on a person’s private parts or underclothing; 1.17.5 Other analogous

cases. 2.2 Less Grave Offenses shall include, but are not limited to: 2.17.1 Repeated sexual jokes or comments that may degrade, humiliate, insult, or offend people who may hear; 2.17.2 Repeated verbal abuse with sexual undertones; 2.17.3 Making offensive hand or body gestures that may resemble sexual activities; 2.17.4 Creating rumors about one’s gender orientation, identity, and/or sex life; 2.17.5 Not considering a person for a role based on their sex, orientation, gender identity, and expression; 265 2.17.6 Making derogatory or degrading remarks directed towards one’s sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or sexual activities; 2.17.7 Repeated offensive hand or body gestures that may resemble sexual activities; 2.17.8 Invasion of the survivor’s privacy through cyberstalking and incessant messaging; 2.17.9 Other analogous cases. 3.3 Grave Offenses shall include, but are not limited to: 3.17.1 Unwanted touching or brushing of the offender’s genitals to any part of another’s body or any part of the offender’s body with another’s genital; 3.17.2 Groping and touching of private parts that include, but not limited to, breasts, genitals, and buttocks; 3.17.3 Forcing someone to kiss or engage in sexual activities; 3.17.4 Attempted or consummated unwanted and forced sexual intercourse or torture in a sexual manner; 3.17.5 Sexual activities that deprive the survivor of their liberty; 3.17.6 Requesting for sexual favor in exchange for employment, promotion, local or 3.17.7 foreign travels, favorable working conditions or assignments, a passing grade, the granting of honors or scholarship, or the grant of benefits or payment of a stipend or allowance; 3.17.8 Physical, psychological, and emotional threats, unwanted sexual misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist remarks and comments online whether publicly or through direct and private messages; 3.17.8.1 Unwanted recording or taking of photos or videos or any other recording that are directed towards a person’s private parts or underclothing; 3.17.8.2 Uploading, sharing, and spreading photos, videos, or any information online —whether real or edited—without the knowledge and consent of the survivor that may cause damage to one’s reputation; 266 3.17.8.3 Impersonating identities of victims online or posting lies about the victims to harm their reputation; or 3.17.8.4 Filing false abuse reports to online platforms to silence victims. 4.4 Physical assault of a sexual nature, such as but not limited to rape, sexual battery, molestation, or attempts to commit these assaults; and 5.5 Other analogous cases. IX. Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) A. A Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) shall be constituted for each case in accordance with the prescribed standards of the Safe Spaces Act. B. Principal Function. The Committee shall serve as an independent internal grievance mechanism that will act as the main body in the investigation and resolution of cases of all forms of sexual harassment and discrimination, as those involving violations of the Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995, the RA11313 or The Safe Spaces Act, and any of the prohibited acts defined in these implementing policies and guidelines, in particular. C. As provided in the RA11313, the CODI shall be chaired by a woman, and not less

than half of its members shall be women. To ensure equal representation, at least one member will be from the LGBTQI sector. Appointment of alternates to meet this criterion shall be made. D. All regular members shall appoint their respective permanent alternates who shall act on their behalf, and with authority to render decision, in case they are not available or when inhibition from the case has been made. E. There shall be a pool of members who shall be trained to handle cases. The CODIs shall be drawn from this pool. Members of the Council for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (CIDW) shall no longer be members of this pool and shall not be assigned to be a part of any CODI. F. Any of the parties, including the complainant and/or respondent, may request for a CODI member to inhibit themselves. The decision shall be made by the UCODI Chair, and affirmed by majority vote of the members excluding the member being questioned. The following may be grounds for conflict of interest, and may serve as a basis for granting of inhibition. i. Relation by consanguinity or affinity ii. Initiative of the member, for reason of close affiliation with any of the parties 267 G. Issues raised by either parties on the member’s ability to be impartial on the case. There shall be two types of CODIs CODI for Cases Involving Faculty and Employees Only: i. Jurisdiction. This Committee shall have jurisdiction over all (a) employees, whether regular or probationary, (b) faculty, whether full-time or part-time, (c) all other employees who have subsisting and executory employment contracts with the University, verbal or written or on a trimestral or yearly basis, when the complainant is another faculty or employee. ii. Composition 1. Representative from top management (academic if case is faculty vs. faculty) 2. Representative from employees from the supervisory rank (academic if case is faculty vs faculty) 3. Representative from rank-and-file employees (academic if case is faculty vs. faculty) 4. Representative from the Unions and Employee Associations (this would be AFED and/or DLSUEA, or DLSU IS Faculty Association, depending on the parties). CODI For Cases Involving Students: i. Jurisdiction. The Committee shall have jurisdiction over (a) employees, whether regular or probationary, (b) faculty, whether full-time or part-time, (c) all other employees who have subsisting and executory employment contracts with the University, verbal or written or on a trimestral or yearly basis, and (d) all students, whether in integrated school, undergraduate, graduate or under exchange or non-degree programs, full-time or part- time, and as defined in the Student Handbook, when the complainant or respondent is a student ii. Composition 1. Representative from the school administrators 2. Representative from the faculty to represent the trainers, instructors, professors or coaches 3. Representative from administrative employees 4. Representative from the students 5. Representative from the parents 268 H. Powers and Functions i. Investigates, hears and decides cases for which it was constituted. ii. Issues subpoenas and other necessary writs and processes for the effective,

efficient, objective, and impartial, and expedient disposition of cases. iii. Makes factual and administrative findings, renders the corresponding decision, and imposes the appropriate penalty in accordance with these policies and guidelines. iv. Exercises other powers necessary to effectuate the Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995 and the Safe Spaces Act. I. Jurisdiction. The Committee shall have jurisdiction over all (a) employees, whether regular or probationary, (b) faculty, whether full-time or part-time, (c) all other employees who have subsisting and executory employment contracts with the University, verbal or written or on a trimestral or yearly basis, and (d) all students, whether in integrated school, undergraduate, graduate or under exchange or non-degree programs, full-time or part-time, and as defined in the Student Handbook. J. Mandate to Investigate. The University adheres to the IRR of Safe Spaces Act that requires prompt investigation to determine the veracity of information or knowledge and the circumstances that under which the act of GBSH or sexual violence were committed or reasonably know an impending act of such and take appropriate steps to collate evidence on its own initiative, and if necessary, relay the evidence for the conduct of an investigation by the Committee on Decorum and Investigation. This provision is regardless whether there was an official complaint filed or a request for the University to take action. X. Procedures A. The CODI shall, at all times, observe due process, investigate and decide on written complaints within ten (10) working days or less upon receipt B. It shall also ensure an appeal process for respondents. C. All sexual harassment and discrimination complaints must be filed with the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (LCIDWell) through its Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces. D. Filing. Any form of sexual harassment or gender-based discrimination committed may be reported verbally or in writing, in English or Filipino, by the complainant, or by any person on behalf of the alleged victim. Formal reports must be signed and notarized by the aggrieved party and accomplished in three (3) copies. It must contain the following: 1. The name and office or affiliation of the individual against whom the complaint is filed; 2. A narration of the circumstances with supporting evidences or documents attached. 269 E. All informal reports done verbally or any other informal means shall be reduced in writing by the Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces using the prescribed complaint form signed by the aggrieved party or representative of the aggrieved party; provided, that all supporting documents submitted shall be attached thereto; 1. In case of incidents reported anonymously, or incidents that have come to the knowledge of LCIDWell without a formal complaint, the Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces will make an inquiry on the incident. In the case of the Integrated School, anonymous reports or incidents that have come to the knowledge of the Student Discipline and Formation Unit (SDFU) without a formal complaint, the SDFU Director will create the incident report for submission to the Coordinator

for Gender and Development and Safe Spaces. F. Upon receipt of a Complaint, the Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces will notify the immediate Supervisor for employees, and the Associate Dean for undergraduate and graduate students. For the Integrated School, it will be the Principal and the Associate Principal for Student Affairs. G. Interview. The Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces shall determine the particulars of the incident to be attested to by the aggrieved party for the purpose of verifying the complaint and providing adequate support and assistance to the victim. H. Notice. – Within five (5) working days from receipt of the complaint, Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces shall serve a notice of complaint upon the person complained of with copies of all pertinent documents. I. If the student involved in the case, whether complainant or respondent, is below 18, his/her parent or guardian shall be served with a notice of complaint with copies of all pertinent documents. J. Answer. – Upon receipt of the notice of complaint, the respondent is required to submit to the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well- being (LCIDWell) three (3) copies of the Counter-Affidavit/Answer, signed and notarized, within three (3) working days from receipt of the notice, furnishing a copy to the complainant; otherwise, the Counter-Affidavit/Answer shall be considered as not filed. The answer, which must be written, signed and notarized, shall be specific and shall contain material facts and applicable laws, if any, including documentary evidence/s, sworn statements covering testimonies of witnesses, if any, in support of the respondent’s case. It shall also include a statement indicating whether he/she elects a formal investigation. The answer must be filed within three (3) days from receipt thereof. K. Prima Facie Determination of Sexual Harassment and all gender-related 270 offenses shall be the role of the University Legal Counsel. The prima facie determination is not appealable. L. Issuance of Formal Charge. After the evaluation of the case by OULC, and once prima facie has been established, the complaint shall be given clearance to proceed. A formal charge will be made against any or all of the respondents within ten (10) working days from the receipt of the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (LCIDWell) report and recommendation/s. M. The Council for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (CIDW), in coordination with the Coordinator for Gender Responsiveness and Safe Spaces shall also form a CODI and recommend this to the CIDW Chair who shall then convene the Council for approval. The CIDW will then formally constitute the CODI assigned for the said case. N. The process in the conduct of hearing shall be prepared by LCIDWell, and shall be approved by the CIDW, pursuant to the provisions stipulated in both RA7877 and RA11313. XI. Corrective Measures. Sanctions and corrective measures shall be determined according to the gravity of the offense. a. For students i. For light offenses 1st offense – Severe reprimand and gender sensitivity reorientation 2nd offense – Suspension for

1 term and gender sensitivity reorientation 3rd offense – Dismissal or Expulsion ii. For less grave offenses 1st offense – Community service of 2 terms and gender sensitivity reorientation 2nd offense – Suspension up to a year and gender sensitivity reorientation 3rd offense – Dismissal or Expulsion iii. For Grave offenses 1st offense - Suspension with formation session to expulsion 2nd offense – Dismissal or Expulsion b. For teaching and non-teaching employees i. For light offenses 1st offense – Severe reprimand and gender sensitivity reorientation 2nd offense – Suspension without pay, with prejudice to subsequent promotion, reclassification, for a period of up to three years, with gender sensitivity reorientation 3rd offense – Dismissal 271 ii. For less grave offenses 1st offense – Suspension without pay, with prejudice to subsequent promotion, reclassification, for a period of up to three years, with gender sensitivity reorientation 2nd offense – Dismissal iii. For grave offenses 1st offense – Dismissal from the University c. Non-teaching personnel They shall adhere to the provisions stipulated in the agreement between their employers and with the University which may include, but is not limited to, formation sessions, severe reprimand, suspension without pay, with prejudice to subsequent promotion, reclassification and permanency and/or dismissal from the University. d. Additional Corrective Measures. Supplementary to the sanctions, the additional corrective measures below may be imposed within the period of service of the corrective measure. The measures include, but are not limited to: i. Written or oral apology whichever is deemed necessary; ii. Well-being treatment; and, iii. Appropriate fines, if necessary. e. In determining whether corrective measures are appropriate or necessary, the following factors may be taken into consideration: i. nature and circumstances of the act committed; ii. frequency and severity of the act; personal circumstances of the person complained of/ respondent (e.g., age, maturity, position, or rank) iii. safety of the parties or community; and, iv. such other relevant factors. These corrective measures may also be adopted in complaints submitted for disposition under the informal procedure. XII. Supplementary Provisions a. Preventive Suspension. Upon the determination of a prima facie case, the OULC may recommend to the Provost or President, as the case may be, may suspend any student, teaching or non- teaching personnel, for a non-extendible period of not more than ninety (90) days from the issuance of formal charge; provided, that no suspension shall be beyond the maximum imposable penalty. i. An order of preventive suspension may be issued to temporarily remove the respondent from the scene of his/her malfeasance or misfeasance and to preclude the possibility of his/her exerting undue 272 influence or pressure on the witnesses against his/her tampering of documentary evidence on file with this Office. ii. A respondent under preventive suspension may be prohibited from any or all of the following: 1. Attending classes and academic activities/rendering work; 2. Entering DLSU academic offices / buildings and their premises; 3. Using DLSU campus facilities, including but not limited to, athletic facilities, libraries, and computer laboratories; except dormitories for athlete

residents, health service, and others as may be recommended 4. Participating in DLSU activities within university premises; 5. Holding student/office jobs; and, 6. Enjoying IT privileges as defined by the current policies on IT uses and resources of the University, except online enrolment. b. Protection Order. For the purpose of preventing retaliatory acts such as but not limited to, disciplining, changing work assignments, or refusing to cooperate or discuss work or school related matters with the complainant because they complained about or resisted harassment, discrimination or retaliation or continuing acts of sexual harassment, a Protection Order may be issued by the Provost or President, as the case may be, on his/her own initiative, or upon application by the complainant, or upon the recommendation of the UCODI. i. A Protection Order may be temporary or permanent. A Temporary Protection Order (TPO) may be issued for not more than ninety (90) days unless the charge is for a grave offense, in which case the TPO is issued for the duration of the proceedings. A Permanent Protection Order (PPO) may be issued as part of the corrective measures. ii. The reliefs granted under a Protection Order shall serve the purpose of safeguarding the complainant from further harm, minimizing any disruption to their daily life, and facilitating their opportunity and ability to independently regain control over their life. The provisions of the Protection Order shall be enforced by the Academic Unit or Office that has authority over the respondent. iii. Violation of the TPO/PPO shall be subject to immediate disciplinary action as recommended by the UCODI to the Provost. c. Alternative Dispute Resolution. This provides the aggrieved party and the respondent the opportunity to settle cases amicably, either through mediation by the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (LCIDWell), if possible within the nature of the case, and with the presence of their respective representatives. It may be resorted to only in one complaint of sexual harassment; provided, that these three requisites occur: it is the first complaint against the person being complained of; the complaint is a light offense; the 273 case is peer-to-peer. d. Appeal. The party aggrieved by the decision of the CODI may file an appeal to the Provost through the Committee within five (5) working days from receipt of the decision. For Faculty and ASF, when the penalty is severance of service or dismissal, the case shall be automatically reviewed by the Service Review Board as prescribed in the 2021 Faculty Manual. e. Resort of the Courts. Nothing in this policy shall preclude the aggrieved party from instituting a separate and independent action for damages and other affirmative relief. f. Malicious Prosecution. While the University is totally committed to the safeguarding of the rights of all members of the academic community against sexual harassment, it is likewise the policy of the University to protect the same members from any malicious accusation and prosecution involving alleged acts of sexual harassment which are baseless and non-existent. This will be referred

to the applicable grievance or disciplinary procedure of the University. g. Independent Action for Damages. Nothing in this policy shall preclude the aggrieved party from instituting a separate and independent action for damages and other affirmative relief. h. Prescriptive Period. All complaints for sexual harassment or gender-based sexual harassment (discrimination) shall be filed with the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (LCIDWell), and may be done at any point of a complainant’s stay in the University or as provided for in the IRR of RA11313 particularly on Sec. 46-Prescriptive period. i. In case a sexual harassment incident happened during the time when a respondent was a bona fide student of DLSU, but is no longer associated with the University (e.g. graduate) at the time of discovery or filing of an independent case by an aggrieved party, the University can withhold the respondent’s good moral certificate and rescind their diploma if found guilty. ii. In case a respondent was a professor or employee during the time of occurrence of the sexual harassment incident, but is no longer associated with the University at the time of discovery or filing of an external case by an aggrieved party, the University shall impose a perpetual employment ban on the respondent if found guilty. i. Confidentiality Clause. At any stage of the investigation, prosecution, and trial of an offense under this policy, the rights of the survivor and the accused shall be recognized and upheld. i. In all cases of Sexual Harassment and Discrimination as enumerated in this policy and the supporting laws, the confidentiality of records on the survivor, and when the accused is a minor, will be protected. 274 j. Amendment. The Provost, with the approval of the Council for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being shall call for the review of this policy or parts of it by members of the Lasallian Community periodically. Any member of the Lasallian Community may propose amendments through an initiative, and may do so with the USG. The amendment, as approved by the CIDW, shall take effect on the first day of the succeeding term. k. Repealing Clause. All administrative orders, rules, regulations, memoranda, circulars, resolutions, and other issuances or orders contrary to the provisions of the DLSU Safe Spaces Policy or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly. This also amends Appendix M (Policies and Guidelines for the Prevention and Investigation of Sexual Harassment Cases) of the Faculty Manual l. Effectivity Clause. This policy shall take effect seven (7) days from publication in DLSU’s official publication and platforms. XIII. Complaints under this Policy Complaints under this policy should be reported to the Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity and Well-being (LCIDWell), (enumerated in Section VIII of this Safe Spaces Policy) (LCIDWell email: lcidw@dlsu.edu.ph). APPENDIX J: ZERO-TOLERANCE FOR ALL FORMS OF VIOLENCE POLICY Section 1: Declaration of the Zero Tolerance for All Forms of Violence Policy In fulfillment of R.A. 11053, otherwise known as “Anti-Hazing Act of 2018”, and in recognition of the University’s responsibility to

safeguard and protect the Lasallian Community from all forms of violence, the University hereby adopts a policy for Zero Tolerance for All Forms of Violence initiated by students and those who are members of recognized and unrecognized student organizations. It is through these proactive steps that we may continue to protect our students from activities that result in physical and psychological harm. Likewise, the University recognizes the right of students to democratically participate in student organizations, alliances, and federations which promote and protect students’ rights and welfare pursuant to our collective right to organize and mobilize (Article III, Section 8 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, otherwise known as the Bill of Rights). Moreover, “No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech, of expression, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances”. 275 As such, it is through this policy that we strongly encourage all student- members of recognized and unrecognized organizations to exercise due diligence and utmost responsibility in its democratic participation in organizations, alliances, and federations and in partaking in student activities, provided, that no actions result in the in the contradiction of the University’s vision and mission, as well as the state’s governing laws. Section 2: Scope The policy covers all students in the Lasallian community. This also covers any actions done by students in the Lasallian community whether committed within and outside of University premises (as defined in Section 5.5.3 of the Student Handbook 2018-2021), and online. Section 3: Definition of Terms 3.1 Hazing as cited in Republic Act No. 11053 is the “...any act that results in physical or psychological suffering, harm, or injury inflicted on a recruit, neophyte, applicant, or member as part of an initiation rite or practice made as a prerequisite for admission or a requirement for continuing membership in a fraternity, sorority, or organization including, but not limited to paddling, whipping, beating, branding, forced calisthenics, exposure to the weather, forced consumption of any food, liquor, beverage, drug or other substance, or any other brutal treatment or forced physical activity which is likely to adversely affect the physical and psychological health of such recruit, neophyte, applicant, or member. This shall also include any activity, intentionally made or otherwise, by one person alone or acting with others, that tends to humiliate or embarrass, degrade, abuse, or endanger, by requiring a recruit, neophyte, applicant, or member to do menial, silly, or foolish tasks.” 3.2 Organization as cited in Republic Act No. 11053 refers to “... organized body of people which includes, but it is not limited to, any club, association, group, fraternity, and sorority. This term shall include the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), the Philippine National Police (PNP), the Philippine Military Academy (PMA), the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA), and other similar uniformed service learning institutions.” 3.3 Exclusion, as defined by the Commission on Higher Education, is the “penalty that allows the institution to exclude or drop the

name of the erring student from the roll of students immediately upon resolution for exclusion was promulgated.” 276 3.4 Expulsion, as defined by the Commission on Higher Education, is “penalty wherein the institution declares an erring student disqualified for admission to any public or private higher education institution in the Philippines.” 3.4.1. A student may only be penalized with expulsion upon the approval of the current Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education. 3.5 Recidivist, as defined by Revised Penal Code (Republic Act 3815) are individuals who “at the time of his trial for one crime, shall have been previously convicted by final judgment of another crime”. For the purposes of this student handbook, this refers to a student who has been found to be responsible for an offense and is now, again, undergoing a disciplinary procedure for committing the same or another offense. 3.6 Welcoming Activities are activities that are a prerequisite for membership in a student organization or serve as an activity to orient and welcome new members. Included under welcoming activities are general assemblies, orientations, recruitment, auditions, initiation or initiation rites. 3.6.1 Initiation or Initiation Rites as defined in Republic Act No. 11053 refers to “...ceremonies, practices, rituals, or other acts, whether formal or informal, that a person must perform or take part in order to be accepted into fraternity, sorority, organization as a full-fledged member. It includes ceremonies, practices , rituals, and other acts in all stages of membership in a fraternity, sorority, or organization.” Section 4: Zero-Tolerance for All Forms of Violence In its commitment to safeguard and protect the Lasallian Community, De La Salle University expresses its zero tolerance for all forms of violence within its community spaces and among its student organizations. Reflecting the principles of our Founder, we are called by the Lasallian Educational Mission to strengthen our commitment in forming vibrant communities of faith and in the democratization of our societies. As we associate with one another and understand our differences, we must not resort to our individualistic desires and treat each other as competition. It is through our communal discernment and accompaniment of one another that we may embody our faith in the Lasallian principle of Association. Through the Lasallian mission, we are called to strongly denounce all forms of violence and instead, commit ourselves into being a safe space where we may freely exercise our principles and express our sense of belonging. 277 APPENDIX K: DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP POLICY Executive Summary The DLSU Digital Citizenship Policy is created to provide the grounding principles on digital technology in the conduct of the various activities that support teaching and learning in the University. This policy intends to expand and include the different members of the DLSU digital community: students, teachers, staff, administrators, other stakeholders, and parents. The policy covers the essential elements of digital citizenship used to identify priority programs and services. These elements are digital access, etiquette, commerce, rights and responsibilities, literacy, law, communication, health and wellness, and security. The DLSU

Digital Citizenship Policy Statement outlines principles aligned with the core beliefs and values shared by the DLSU Community, operating in the digital or virtual environment. These principles will guide and align the creation, upkeep, review for relevance, and currency of other policies, guidelines, and procedures of the University. The fundamental principles revolve around safety and protection, respect, and education of the members of the DLSU Community in accessing, using, interacting, and transacting in the digital world. a. Be Safe: Protect Yourself and Others → Protect the Lasallian Community and me in the digital environment. b. Be Savvy: Educate Yourself and Others → Continuously educate ourselves and be critical and responsible in the use of technology. c. Be Social: Respect Yourself and Others → “Digital” citizens create a safe digital space where mutual respect exists. The primary principles are: Principle 1: The Digital Self is not distinct from Real-World Self Principle 2: Digital Citizenship is in All Digital Spaces Principle 3: Online Media Literacy and University Responsibility to Online Safety and Protection Principle 4: Promoting Accountability and Due Diligence The Policy aligns with the existing laws and technology-related policies and serves as the reference policy in the manuals and guidelines of the members of the DLSU Community. 278 I. Purpose “A better world is possible thanks to technological progress if this is accompanied by an ethic inspired by a vision of the common good, an ethic of freedom, responsibility, and fraternity, capable of fostering the full development of people in relation to others and to the whole of creation.” Pope Francis, “Common Good in the Digital Age (2019)” Lasallian education is grounded on the life experiences of its learners and prepares them for successful placement in society, especially in the workplace (The Declaration on the Lasallian Educational Mission, 2020). As a Lasallian tertiary school, De La Salle University recognizes its crucial role in preparing citizens and professionals who will be society’s next leaders. The process of Lasallian formation enables persons to acquire the vision, values, attitudes, and practices that will allow them to freely and willingly collaborate with God in building a community that reflects the Gospel values (Guiding Principles of the Philippine Lasallian Family, 2009). Three elements allow Lasallians to participate in God’s action in the world. Taken together as one dynamic unity, these elements integrate and articulate the Lasallian vocation: The spirit of faith allows one to discover God’s active presence in the world, to interpret, judge, and evaluate things in the light of the gospel, to unite one’s actions and intentions with God’s, and to rely on God’s providence in acting in discerning God’s will. Zeal is the active expression of faith in gospel witness and service. It is oriented towards the integral salvation of persons and is expressed as the enthusiastic and wholehearted giving of oneself to serve others, especially the poor and the vulnerable. Communion in mission suggests solidarity and collaboration from sharing in one vision, one spirit, and one mission. It is a way of

relating to others that suggests openness to all persons and the desire to be brother or sister to all, especially those in need. Guided by these principles, De La Salle University declares itself a Lasallian educational community where all sectors are committed to ensuring the integral human and Christian development of all learners and are co-responsible for creating a culture and climate conducive to genuine learning and character formation. 279 Technological innovations have redefined the way we interact, learn, and transact with each other. Whether we like it or not, we are forced to engage with one another in the digital world. While there are more conventional ways of working and interacting in the physical space, our engagement with each other using the Internet and other digital tools is less defined. This could lead to confusion and tensions, especially when our ways of engaging with members of the Lasallian community and the larger society do not meet underlying expectations. We must define how we ought to interact and engage with each other in the digital space while being true to our Guiding Principles. We recognize our university’s role in forming citizens capable of exercising their rights, fulfilling their duties, defending the public good, strengthening the social fabric, participating in democratic processes, and being concerned about policies and politics (The Declaration, 2020). Therefore, our duty as a Lasallian institution is to create a school environment conducive to respect and order, by establishing explicit norms and policies, not only in the physical but also in the digital space. Hence, this Digital Citizenship Policy aims to articulate our collective agreements on how we, as a Lasallian community, would like to engage, interact, and relate with each other in the digital environment. II. Scope The policy encapsulates the responsible use of technology in the teaching and learning process and all other aspects of life within the DLSU community. The policy provides the principles and guidelines in the conduct of the various programs and services in academics, research, engagement, and administration by all community members, expressly but not limited to the students in all levels, faculty, administrators, staff, and partners, and other stakeholders. Moreover, developing the policy also engaged the active participation of parents, who are instrumental in developing students to become responsible digital citizens. This policy intends to expand and include the different members of the DLSU digital community: students, teachers, staff, administrators, other stakeholders, and parents. The policy covers the essential elements of digital citizenship, also used to identify priority programs and services. These elements are digital access, etiquette, commerce, rights and responsibilities, literacy, law, communication, health and wellness, and security. The policy is guided by and aligned with the following technology- 280 related laws: 1. Anti-Bullying Act of 2013 2. Cybercrime Prevention Act (RA 10175) 3. Data Privacy Act (RA 10173) 4. Anti Photo and Video Voyeurism Act (RA 9995) 5. e-Commerce Act (RA 8792) 6. Safe Spaces Act (RA 11313) 7. Intellectual Property Law III. Definition of Terms DLSU Community The

DLSU community is composed of the students, faculty, staff, administrators, parents, external partners, and other stakeholders of the University. Digital Citizen A digital citizen is an individual who uses the internet regularly and effectively. (Mossberger, Tolbert, & McNeal, 2008). The individual is expected to be responsible for using technology to respect, educate and protect oneself and others. Digital Citizenship Digital citizenship is the ability to participate in society online. (Mossberger, Tolbert, & McNeal, 2008). Digital citizenship encompasses membership in a virtual community where each citizen has rights and responsibilities. Digital citizenship requires the development and compliance to behavioral norms that are appropriate & responsible in the utilization of technology. These norms shape the community culture grounded on respect, motivates active and accountable participation of members, and bring forth positive attitudes toward each other. Digital Access Digital Access allows full participation in the digital society. It provides fair access to technology and encourages proper use to enhance the learning process of all involved. The university develops policies 281 and support mechanisms to make technology accessible to all its stakeholders. Digital Etiquette Digital Etiquette refers to the electronic standards of conduct or procedural norms that shape the behavior of technology users. This set of criteria integrates the Lasallian values emphasizing responsible and respectful behavior of stakeholders in the online environment. Digital Commerce Digital commerce refers to the online buying and selling of goods. All digital citizens, in one way or another, participate in digital commerce. Thus, the Lasallian digital citizenship policy includes the norms of behavior that will protect all members of the Lasallian community as they engage in digital commerce. Digital Rights and Responsibilities Digital citizenship affords its members rights, and along with those rights come responsibilities. As digital citizens, Lasallians are given the right to use the Internet for their work and education. Still, some expectations and responsibilities go along with this right. Digital Literacy Digital literacy includes not just the basic skills needed to operate digital technologies, but more importantly the capacity to evaluate and use digital information critically in order to transform it into knowledge (Buckingham, 2006). Thus, digitally literate individuals can ask questions about sources of such information, the agenda of its producers, and how this information represents the world and relates to broader social, political, and economic factors that affect society. Digital Law Digital law refers to the legal requirements, legal decisions, and ethics related to the digital environment. As digital citizens, Lasallians must be aware of legal requirements, legal decisions, and ethics to ensure that their use of digital technologies is always in compliance with the law. Digital Communication Digital communication refers to the exchange of information in the digital world. Such communication may occur synchronously (e.g., chat, video call) or asynchronously (e.g., post on social media, blog post). This requires clear expectations for safe and secure communication in the online environment. 282 Digital Security Digital Security refers to electronic precautions to protect students, employees, and the university. This digital citizenship policy identifies who and

what must be secured and the necessary actions to address security risks. Digital Health and Wellness Digital health and wellness refer to individuals’ physical and psychological well-being while engaging in the digital environment. Physical health is addressed by ensuring the ergonomics of the workplace to avoid injuries brought about by the frequent use of technologies. Ensuring the psychological well-being of the Lasallian community while in the digital environment entails supporting their mental health needs to function well and lead balanced lives. IV. Policy Statement As De La Salle University continuously introduces and improves access to digital technology to enable and support its activities in teaching and learning, research, and community engagement, including digital platforms that allow enrollment, online payments, collaboration, and communication, the University recognizes the need to likewise continuously help the DLSU Community that have access to digital platforms, to be responsible and ethical digital citizens. The University thus commits to providing the structures and programs to ensure that the digital environment it opens to the DLSU Community is safe, protected, and continuously educated. Digital literacy campaigns, digital citizenship curriculums, and formations express such structures or programs. The DLSU Digital Citizenship Policy Statement (this document) outlines principles aligned with the core beliefs and values shared by the DLSU Community, operating in the digital or virtual environment. These principles will guide and align the creation, upkeep, review for relevance, and currency of other policies, guidelines, and procedures of the University. The key principles revolve around safety and protection, respect, and education of the members of the DLSU Community in accessing, using, interacting, and transacting in the digital world. Be Safe: Protect Yourself and Others → Protect myself and the Lasallian Community in the digital environment. Be Savvy: Educate Yourself and Others → Continuously educate 283 ourselves and be critical and responsible in the use of technology. Be Social: Respect Yourself and Others → “Digital” citizens create a safe digital space where mutual respect exists. Principle 1: The Digital Self is not distinct from Real-World Self Focusing on the self The University will keep its integrity and core values and beliefs espoused by every Lasallian member, for both the real and digital worlds. The DLSU University, with the DLSU Community, endeavors to continuously understand and appreciate the implications of the digital self and the digital footprint one leaves in the digital world. A. Acknowledging this principle, the University commits to promoting and protecting the exercise of all human rights online (G7 Internet Safety Principles, 2021) B. Ethical standards and values one exhibits in real-world situations are to be expected from the digital self. C. Further provisions on responsibilities, rights, and even admonitions, offenses, and sanctions are articulated in the different manuals, policies, and guidelines under which the DLSU community falls. D. A digital document is functionally equivalent to a physical document. E. A duplicate copy is considered an original document (2019 Amendments to the 1989 Revised Rules on Evidence) Principle 2: Digital Citizenship is in All Digital Spaces Focusing on the

interaction with others Recognizing geographical and time boundaries, it is asserted that the concept of digital “citizenship” is not bounded by space and time. This is in the same manner and assertion that values and beliefs are not determined by such. Thus the University endeavors to provide continuous education and formation to all of the DLSU Community to ensure that the principles and values of Digital citizenship are practiced at all times and in all places. It ensures that all policies and prevailing laws uphold and foster human rights and respect for all persons. 284 Principle 3: Online Media Literacy and University Responsibility to Online Safety and Protection Focusing on Enablement The University should have the policies, systems, and processes in place to respect human rights online, improve safety, and reduce illegal and harmful content and activity in the digital environment it provides to the DLSU Community. Likewise, the DLSU Community aims to continuously educate oneself to have the digital competence, skills, knowledge, and discernment to make informed and safe choices online and protect the information entrusted to one’s care. The University provides the avenue by which education and empowerment happen (G7 Internet Safety Principles, 2021) Principle 4: Promoting Accountability and Due Diligence Recognizing the Roles and Responsibilities Within the Digital Space. As digital citizens, members of the DLSU community are expected to be responsible and accountable for all their actions in the use of technology. It is imperative that we are aware of the serious rights and responsibilities that come with operating in the digital space, and accept these terms to make it a safer space for everyone (UAE Digital WellBeing Council, 2021). Similarly, the University must practice due diligence in implementing the policies and laws governing the responsible use of digital tools and resources. The University safeguards the rights and responsibilities of its members to ensure a safe digital environment for all. V. Related Policies: The policy serves as the reference document and parent policy for policies related to digital citizenship. These policies are included in the following manuals and guidelines: 1. Student Handbook 2. Faculty Manual 3. Administration Manual 4. APSP Manual 5. CAP Manual 6. Social Media Guidelines 7. DLSU Policy on Intellectual Property 8. DLSU Institutional Identity 285 APPENDIX L UNIVERSITY ATTIRE POLICY VALUES De La Salle University endeavors to be a safe space for all its members and guests. As stated in the Lasallian Guiding Principles, Lasallian education is marked by a communal spirit that enables all sectors of the school and all those who support its work to collaborate in educating towards a world that is more humane, where no one is excluded from the banquet of life. It looks upon all its members as co-responsible for creating a culture and climate conducive to genuine learning and character formation. It challenges learners to realize their full potential by promoting critical and creative thinking, self-knowledge, and self-mastery, encouraging synergy, collaboration, and dialogue in an environment that is hospitable, and where learners translate their knowledge

into actual practice for the betterment of society. It defines its campus as a safe space where its members’ and guests’ right to free speech, self-expression, self-identity, comfort in talents, disabilities or incapacities, are protected. It promotes respect, openness, and accommodation amidst diversity, and therefore promotes the value of difference and pluralism that celebrate various ways of being in the world. UNIVERSITY ATTIRE The way individuals dress themselves is a way of expressing personality, self-identity, advocacy, spirituality, or religion, among other things. The University, therefore, will not impose a dress code that discriminates on the basis of sex and gender, socio-economic status, mental health/ development, physical ailments and disabilities, genes, race, and religion. It encourages its students to learn how to be independent and to make good decisions, including in the way they clothe themselves. The University acknowledges that everyone has the right to dress comfortably, to be responsible for their own behavior, and to be able to effectively focus on the learning process amidst possible distractions. The minimum required University attire is aimed at keeping the learning space safe during specific class activities, allowing students to be comfortable and to express their gender identity, religious affiliation, and advocacy, without fear of discipline or discrimination. 286 BASIC PRINCIPLE Students may dress according to their preferred gender expression so long as genitals, buttocks, and nipples are covered with opaque material. Except in situations where activity-specific attire is required for safety and comfort, students can wear any top and bottom that are not just undergarments, and any footwear. Students cannot wear clothing with: • violent language or images. • images and/or language depicting drugs or alcohol (or any illegal item or activity) or the use of the same. • hate speech, profanity, pornography, printed or implied. • images and/or language using stereotypes based on any group or class, that create a hostile or intimidating environment for anyone. These guidelines apply to both face-to-face and online classes and activities. Any student caught wearing clothing with such images or language will be sent or called to the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) to discuss the possible violation, and if the act is found inexcusable, will be given a warning. A student found wearing banned clothing after four (4) warnings will be charged with a minor offense. DRESS CODE Faculty members teaching specific classes may require a dress code as long as it is relevant to the activity in class or the nature of the course. The dress code and the rationale for it are included in the syllabus and discussed with the class at the beginning of the term, making sure that the class-specific dress code does not pose unreasonable inconvenience on the students. Non-compliance with the class dress code will be given sanction within the class grading system and will not be treated as a Student Handbook violation. Invitations to activities or required activities held outside the regular classrooms, which require a dress code, e.g., theater, conference rooms, chapel, laboratories, sports building, etc.,

will indicate the reasonable clothing requirement in the invitations or announcements. Without an 287 indicated event dress code, students can wear anything to the event, except clothing not allowed by the University. Students who are unable to comply may be stopped at the gates/doors discreetly, and given an option to remedy their attire by fetching their own additional clothing available on campus or somewhere nearby, or by borrowing from friends. They will not be forced to wear any clothing without their consent and will be given a choice to comply with the event’s dress code and join the activity, or miss it altogether. If anyone’s learning process is adversely affected by anyone’s clothing— for example, tall hats, hair ornaments, or big or fluffy tops—obstructing somebody’s line of sight, one may discreetly and politely ask the person to adjust or remove the obstructing but inessential piece of clothing if possible, unless a simple transfer to another seat is an open option. Faculty teaching a class may discreetly ask students to remove hats, pull down hoodies from their heads, remove sunglasses, veils, etc., if it is important to them that they see clearly their student’s faces, or during an activity, such as taking quizzes/examinations. VALUING DIALOGUE The University promotes openness and critical thinking in all situations. It encourages all the members of the Lasallian community to make open communication the first course of action in case of conflicts. Students, faculty, personnel, administrators, and policy enforcers are expected to ask questions and engage in deep dialogue while maintaining mutual respect and preserving everyone’s dignity in the process towards mutual understanding. 288 APPENDIX M POLICIES ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 1. Introduction As an Institution of higher learning, De La Salle University-Manila is committed to provide an atmosphere that supports the research and scholarly works of its faculty, students, and staff. The University acknowledges the necessity to provide policies to promote and encourage excellence, creativity and innovation in research and other scholarly works by identifying and protecting the rights of the University, its faculty, staff, and students. These policies are intended to provide the basic framework for the treatment by the University of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). They are stated in broad terms in order for the details of the policies to evolve from their interpretation and application in individual cases. The policies are not meant to be mechanically applied but should be interpreted in terms of two major concerns of the university. First, the university, as a resource of Church and State, is committed to the use of inventions and intellectual creations for the common good. Second, the university is committed to scholarship and individual academic freedom of its faculty, students, and staff to write and publish. 2. Definition of Terms Unless otherwise specified, the following terms shall have the meaning provided in these policies: 2.1 “Author” means the natural person who originates, gives existence to or expresses an idea and transforms it into some tangible form under copyright law. 2.2 “Commissioned Work” or “Work

for Hire” means a work where the University specifically commissions or hires a University employee or any third person to create a work for a fee and which the University on one hand and the inventor, author or third party on the other expressly agree in a written instrument that it be considered as such. The University shall own the intellectual property of the commissioned work, unless otherwise provided in the contract. 2.3 “Copyrightable Work” means any literary or artistic work, 289 2.4 Whether original or derivative, which has been expressed or done in some tangible form as enumerated under Sections 172 and 173 of the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines including any amendments thereto. 2.5 “IP Policies” means the Policies on Intellectual Property of De La Salle University and its amendments. 2.6 “Intellectual Property” means any property defined as such by the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines (RA 8293) such as, but not limited to, patents, patentable inventions, utility models, industrial designs, layout designs of integrated circuits, marks, copyright, computer software, technical know-how, trade secrets, and plant varieties. 2.7 “Inventor” means a person who creates or discovers a new method, form, device, process or composition of matter which is patentable under the law. 2.8 “Invention” means a novel creation, discovery, idea, or device that may be patented under the law. 2.9 “Patent” is the exclusive right of the owner against unlicensed use or exploitation of the patented product or process or any improvement thereof. 2.10 “Regularly-assigned duties” means the work, duty, or responsibility of the university employee as enumerated in the job description or employee/faculty manual, or the regular duties assigned by a superior as part of his/her regular workload. Works submitted to the university as a requirement for continued employment or promotion shall be considered as work done according to the regularly assigned duties of the university employee. In cases of copyright, however, the ownership of works submitted by a university employee as a requirement for promotion, longevity pay, or research incentive pay under the faculty manual shall not be considered as work done according to the regularly-assigned duties of the university employee and shall, therefore, be owned by the author. This is subject to the provision on copyright under section 6.1 of these policies. 2.11 “Students” shall have the same meaning as defined in the DLSU Student Handbook and the DLSU Graduate Student Handbook. 2.12 “Substantial Use of the facilities and/or resources of the University” means either that: a) University funds were used to specifically support 290 the development of the intellectual property; b) The work could not have been developed or created without using the facilities or resources of the University; or There is use of resources of the University that are not students such as, but not limited to, laboratories and technical computer software. However, the use of office, library, computers and servers of the university shall not constitute substantial use of University facilities and resources. 2.13 “Trademark” or “Mark” means a distinctive

word, design, symbol, logo or any combination of word and design that identifies and distinguishes the goods or services of one from that of another. 2.14 “University” refers to De La Salle University. 2.15 “University employees” refer to teaching and/or research faculty, academic service faculty, administrative service personnel and co-academic personnel whether part-time, full-time, contractual, or casual employees of De La Salle University. It shall also refer to visiting professors or other persons who have official teaching, research or other academic engagement with the University. 2.16 “Work/s” shall mean any kind of intellectual property. 3. Coverage of these Policies 3.1 These policies apply to university employees, students and such other persons who participate in research and other scholarly projects at the University. The policies cover all kinds of intellectual properties under the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines (RA 8293) and related laws. 4. Prior Disclosure Requirement 4.1 All persons subject to these policies are required to promptly disclose all inventions and other scholarly works in which the University has or may have an ownership interest under Sections 5.2 and 6.2 of these policies, or for which disclosure is required by contract or law. Disclosure shall be made in writing by submitting a disclosure form to the Vice Presidentfor Research and Innovation (VPRI) and copy furnished the Director of the Intellectual Property Office of the University. 291 4.2 All contracted works by university employees from third parties must have the express written approval of the University. Where the work was developed through an agreement between the University and a third party, the ownership of the intellectual property shall be subject to the terms of the contract. 5. Ownership of Patent 5.1 Owned by Inventor Rights to patents shall belong to the inventor except in the instances stated in section 5.2 of these policies. Notwithstanding ownership of the inventor of his works, the university or any member of the academic community is allowed, without infringing any intellectual property right, free access to and use of their works to pursue or develop them for non-commercial and academic purposes. 5.2 Owned by the University Rights to Patent shall belong to the University if any one of the following circumstances exists: a.) The invention was developed as part of the regularly- assigned duties of the inventor; b.) The invention was developed using funds provided or administered by or through the University; c.) The invention was developed making substantial use of the facilities or resources of the University; d.) Commissioned work by the University or “Work for Hire”; e.) The ownership of the invention was assigned by the inventor to the university; and f.) In case of students,the invention or work was developed when he/she received financial support from the University in the form of tuition waiver, scholarship, stipend or allowance regardless of the amount. g.) Works whose inventors cannot be determined. 5.3 Externally Funded or Sponsored If the patentable invention arose or was related to an undertaking covered by distinct agreement of the inventor

and a third party using funds not administered by or through the University or where the University has no claim 292 of ownership under Section 5.2, the terms of the agreement will prevail over these policies. In the absence of any contrary provision in the agreement, these policies shall apply to externally funded or sponsored research. 5.4 Student Works In the case of student works produced and submitted as class assignments or as course requirements, these works are owned by the students, unless it falls under the instances stated in section 5.2, except paragraph (a). The University by University employees in the course of their mentoring assignment as part of their regularly-assigned duties. In cases not falling under section 5.2, the faculty member/s and the student/s concerned may enter into an agreement prior to the mentoring engagement specifying, among others, the ownership of the intellectual property and the sharing of royalties. In case there is no agreement, the ownership of the patent shall belong to the student. Notwithstanding ownership by students of their works, the university or any member of the academic community is allowed, without infringing any intellectual property right, free access to and use of the student works to pursue or develop them for non-commercial and academic purposes. 5.5 Reversion of Ownership In the event that the University decides not to file a patent application or claim ownership of the patent under paragraph 5.2 within one hundred (100) calendar days from receipt of the patent disclosure form of the invention, ownership of the invention or the work shall automatically revert to the inventor subject to the agreement, if any, entered into by the University with a funding or sponsoring agency prior to the research. 5.6 Assignment of Royalty In cases where the patent rights belong to the University under section 5.2, it may, at its own discretion, assign royalty shares to the inventor. The royalty sharing shall be based on the implementing rules and regulations of these IP Policies to be hereinafter adopted, unless there is an agreement to the contrary. 5.7 Assignment of Patent 5.7.1 In cases covered by section 5.2, the inventor shall execute a deed of assignment of patent together with the disclosure form required under paragraph 2.1 of these policies in favor of the University. 5.7.2 In cases where the inventor assigns the patent rights to the University, the University shall take care of the filing of the patent and the payment of the filing and maintenance fees. 293 5.8 Outside Consultants and Independent Contractors 5.8.1 The University shall own the patent of any work produced by non-university employees who are contracted to perform certain work for the university as consultants or independent contractors, unless specified otherwise in a written agreement between the parties. 5.8.2 The University shall own the patent of any work produced by university employees under the instances mentioned in section 5.2 of these policies who are acting as consultants or independent contractors of third parties, unless there is an agreement

to the contrary between the University and the third party. 6. Ownership of Copyright 6.1 Owned by Author Rights to copyright shall belong to the author for as long as the work was not funded or in any manner financially supported by the University, whether or not it is part of the regular duties of the author, subject to exceptions stated in section 6.2 of these policies. In case of multiple authors, ownership shall be determined by stipulation of the parties. In case there is no stipulation, the VPRI shall assist the parties in determining the authors’ respective ownership in the work. In case the authors cannot agree, they shall have equal shares in the ownership of the intellectual property. Notwithstanding ownership of the author of his works, the university or any member of the academic community is allowed, without infringing any intellectual property right, free access to and use of their works to pursue or develop them for non-commercial and academic purposes. 6.2 Owned by the University Rights to Copyright shall belong to the University if any one of the following circumstances exists: ( a) the work was done using funds provided or administered by or through the University; (b) the work was done making substantial use of the facilities or resources of the University; ( c) commissioned work by the University or “Work for Hire”; 294 ( d) teaching or training materials or modules created as part of the regularly-assigned duties of the university employee; ( e ) the ownership of the copyright was assigned by the author to the university; ( f ) In case of students, the work was developed or created when he/she received financial support from the University in the form of tuition waiver, scholarship, stipend or allowance regardless of the amount; and (g) Works whose authorship cannot be determined. 6.3 Externally Funded or Sponsored Work If the work arose or was related to an undertaking covered by distinct agreement of the author and a third party using funds not administered by or through the University or where the University has no claim of ownership under Section 6.2, the terms of the agreement will prevail over these policies. In the absence of any contrary provision in the agreement, these policies shall apply to externally funded or sponsored research. 6.4 Student Works In the case of student works produced and submitted as class assignments or as course requirements, these works are owned by the students, unless it falls under the instances stated in section 6.2. The University may claim copyright over works contributed by University employees in the course of their mentoring assignment as part of their regularly-assigned duties. In cases not falling under section 6.2, the faculty member/s and the student/s concerned may enter into an agreement prior to the mentoring engagement specifying, among others, the ownership of the intellectual property, and the sharing of royalties. In case there is no agreement, the ownership of the patent shall belong to the student. Notwithstanding ownership

by students of their works, the university or any member of the academic community is allowed, without infringing any intellectual property right, free access to and use of the student works to pursue or develop them for non-commercial and academic purposes. 6.5 Reversion of Ownership In the event that the University decides not to claim ownership over the work under paragraph 6.2 within one hundred (100) calendar days from receipt of the copyright disclosure form of the work, ownership of the copyright shall automatically revert to the author subject to the agreement, if any, entered into by the University with a funding or sponsoring agency prior to the research. 295 6.6 Assignment of Royalty In cases where the copyright belongs to the University under section 6.2, it may, at its own discretion, assign royalty shares to the inventor. The royalty sharing shall be based on the implementing rules and regulations of these IP Policies to be hereinafter adopted, unless there is an agreement to the contrary. 6.7 Assignment of Copyright 6.7.1 In cases covered by section 6.2, the author shall execute a deed of assignment of copyright together with the disclosure form required under paragraph 4.1 of these policies in favor of the University. 6.7.2 The University shall be responsible for submitting copies of the work to the National Library and Supreme Court Library or to the appropriate government agency. 6.8 Outside Consultants and Independent Contractors 6.8.1 The University shall own the copyright of any work produced by non-university employees who are contracted to perform work for the university as consultants or independent contractors, unless specified otherwise in a written agreement between the parties. 6.8.2 The University shall own the copyright of any work produced by university employees under the instances mentioned in section 6.2 of these policies who are acting as consultants or independent contractors of third parties, unless there is an agreement to the contrary between the University and the third party. 7. Ownership of Trademark The University exclusively owns the trade marks, service marks, emblems, logos, symbols and other marks that it uses and distributes in relation to its goods or services. The rules on the use, exploitation and distribution of these marks, logos and symbols are contained in specific University policy and guidelines on the use of trademarks now existing or to be adopted in the future. The Office for Strategic Communications (STRATCOM) shall be responsible for the registration and management of all marks of the University. It also has the sole authority to engage in or approve the development, design and sale of merchandise with the registered marks of the University. 296 8. University Information All persons covered by these policies are not allowed to divulge any information arising from research, patentable device or technology, trade secrets or other related information which are necessary for the protection of the intellectual property rights of the University. In case of doubt as to the nature of the university information, the party concerned should secure a clearance from

the VCR before divulging any information. 9. Functions of the DLSU Intellectual Property Office (DIPO) The DLSU Intellectual Property Office (DIPO), which shall also act as the Technology Licensing Office (TLO) of the University, is an office under the Vice President of Research & Innovation which was established to implement the IP Policies of the University. The DIPO is headed by a Director and shall have the following functions: (a) Oversees all activities directly related to the management, development and protection of the University’s intellectual property; (b) Assists in the drafting of contracts, agreements, affidavits, patent applications and other documents which are necessary to protect the intellectual property rights of the University; (c) Recommends appropriate actions for enforcement of intellectual property rights and coordinates with the University Legal Counsel for the filing of appropriate actions and other measures to protect the intellectual property rights of the University; (d) Answers queries from faculty, students and staff in matters pertaining to the protection of intellectual property; (e) As a TLO, assists in the evaluation of the commercial potential of works and assists in technology commercialization activities referred to it by the University; (f) As a TLO, assists in the negotiation of licensing agreements, joint ventures, spin-offs and other similar contracts referred to it by the University; (g) Reviews contracts and other agreements concerning intellectual property matters referred to it by University; (h) Initiates the creation and revision of University policies, strategies, guidelines and procedures concerning intellectual property; (i) Coordinates activities with the other units in the University to promote awareness and compliance to intellectual property laws and policies; 297 (j) Prepares and executes a system for documenting and tracking University-owned intellectual property; (k) Represents the University in Intellectual Property organizations, associations and societies; (l) Proposes and defends budget for activities related to its functions; (m) Approves and monitors expenses for activities related to its functions. Please refer to the complete text of the IP policies here: https://www.dlsu.edu.ph/research/offices/dipo/ip-policies/ 10. Intellectual Property Offenses The University recognizes the exclusive rights of inventors, authors and artists over their intellectual property creations. For this reason, it shall protect the rights of the owners of intellectual property over all forms of infringement such as: (a) Photocopying of printed materials or copying of computer software without the permission of the author/s or creator/s, subject to the rules on fair use of copyrighted work and the other exceptions thereto as stated in the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines (RA 8293); (b) Use, distribution, transfer, rental, sale or production of counterfeit, unlicensed or pirated intellectual property contained in optical media as defined under the Optical Media Act of 2003 (RA 9239); (c) Violation of the confidentiality rule under Section 8 of these policies; (d) Deliberate failure to comply with the prior disclosure requirement under Section 4 of these policies; (e) Unauthorized use, distribution, transfer, rental, sale or production of university-owned intellectual property; (f) Plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty; (g) All other acts analogous to the foregoing. 298 11.

Establishment of the University Committee on Intellectual Property (UCIP) The University Committee on Intellectual Property (UCIP) shall be constituted for the following purposes: a) To administer and interpret these IP policies. b) To determine the rights of parties to the intellectual property for the purpose of settling disputes limited to the ownership of intellectual property and sharing of royalties. c) To adjudicate disputes concerning implementation and interpretation of these IP policies. d) To recommend changes to these IP policies. The UCIP shall be headed by the Associate Vice-Chancellor for Research and Learning and will be composed of the Director of the Intellectual Property Office, the University Legal Counsel and two (2) retired University fellows as members. The UCIP shall invite the following sectoral representatives if the issue in dispute involves their particular sector: (1) Student Representative (for issues concerning students); (2) Faculty Association Representative (for issues concerning teaching and/or research faculty members); and (3) Staff Representative (for issues concerning academic service faculty/personnel and co-academic personnel). 12. Penalties Any person found to have violated any of the provisions of these policies shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the faculty, student, staff, administrative or applicable employment manual/handbook. All items in Section 10 shall be considered as major offenses. 13. Waiver of IP Policy The University President, in his own initiative or through the recommendation of the University Committee on Intellectual Property (UCIP), shall have the sole discretion to waive or vary any or all of the provisions of these policies on a case-to-case basis if a strict application of these policies shall not result in fairness and equity in a particular case. A waiver or variance of the intellectual property policies made in one case shall not serve as a precedent to any future or subsequent case. 299 14. Amendment or Revision Any university employee or student may propose changes to these IP Policies by writing a letter addressed the AVCREL specifying the proposed changes and the reasons for the proposed changes. The UCIP shall make an annual review of these IP Policies in one of its meetings. 15. Repealing Clause These IP Policies supersede the previous IP Policies and its subsequent revision dated June 25, 2008 and February 11, 2009 respectively. All other University policies inconsistent with these policies are repealed accordingly. 16. Effectivity Clause These Revised IP Policies shall take effect immediately upon its approval on July 7, 2010. 300 APPENDIX N DLSU POLICY AND GUIDELINES ON THE USE OF TRADEMARKS Trademark history De La Salle University, thru the Strategic Communications, registered the following trademarks: ’De La Salle University’ and logo ’The future begins here’ ‘Animo La Salle’ ’Star Scholars’ and design ‘Hip to be here’ ‘Keep learning’ DLSU likewise applied for the trademark registration of the following: ’DLSU-M’ Slanted star device Green archer device ’La Salle Green Archers’ ’Animo La Salle’ ‘We mean business’ ‘Where great minds meet’ ‘Creating the next great idea.’ For the following goods and services (including but not limited to): Institutional

collateral such as calling cards, marketing kits, brochures, posters, stationeries, letterheads, and envelopes; Souvenir items or merchandise which promote the University such as jackets, t-shirts, towels, bags, shorts, pants, mugs, pins, stickers; Institutional advertisements, namely posters, billboards, print ads, television ads, special supplements, electronic ads; and identification tokens which signify affiliation with DLSU such as institutional identification cards, membership cards in University-recognized organizations. 301 The trademarks are the exclusive property of De La Salle University. Policies and procedures have been developed for the use or application for use of the trademarks. The Office of Strategic Communications (STRATCOM) has been given the sole authority to engage in or approve the development, design, and sale of merchandise with the registered or applied trademarks mentioned above. The office evaluates and approves all applications for the use of the trademarks. General information A “mark” means any visible sign capable of distinguishing the goods (trademark) or services (service mark) of an enterprise and shall include a stamped or marked container of goods. (Sec. 38, R.A. No. 166a) A “collective mark” means any visible sign designated as such in the application for registration and capable of distinguishing the origin or any other common characteristic, including the quality of goods or services of different enterprises which use the sign under the control of the registered owner of the collective mark. (Sec. 40, R.A. No. 166a) General policies De La Salle University is a non-stock, non-profit educational corporation engaged in teaching and research. Given its nature as an educational institution, De La Salle University runs a limited, well-defined program for the use of the trademarks and shall screen applicants in accordance with the following general policies: To protect the integrity of the name of the University and enhance its image through the use of its name and logo; and To prohibit the use and association of its name, symbols and logos to persons, groups or activities whose values are not consistent with those of the University. Prior approval by the Office for Strategic Communications An approval to use any of the registered or applied trademarks should first be requested and obtained from the STRATCOM if the name or logo will be used on products or merchandise that will be sold or distributed to the public. The approval to use will only give a non-exclusive right to use the registered or applied trademark on products with quality and design approved by the Office for Strategic Communications from the submitted prototypes. 302 Students who wish to produce merchandise as part of their fundraising activity for a specific event must first seek the approval of the Office for Strategic Communications. Time duration of commercial production and selling of the merchandise will be on a per approval basis. The STRATCOM will evaluate the expressed written request or application for the use of any of the following trademarks and determine the specific terms and conditions of the use of any of the trademarks by the applicant. All merchandise shall be prototyped and approved

by the STRATCOM before production and delivery. All prototypes must be based on the original specifications submitted for quotation. Approval to use any of the registered trademarks may only be executed as promotional or premium items for confined commercial use and on a limited duration. Promotional use must follow the terms and conditions of De La Salle University on sponsorship and solicitation. Unapproved use of any of the following trademarks will be penalized and sanctioned as a minor offense, as stated in the De La Salle University Student Handbook. Violators will be ordered to immediately cease the production and selling of all merchandise bearing the University’s Trademarks. No other retailer or supplier, unless otherwise approved by the STRATCOM, is allowed to sell their merchandise for commercial purposes. No assumption of liability or warranty In granting the approval of an application to use any of the following registered or applied trademarks, the University does not assume any representation or warranty on the goods or merchandise of the applicant. As a condition of the approval to be granted, the applicant answers for all representations and warranties on their products and their condition. The applicant shall hold De La Salle University, its officers and employees free and harmless from any product liability, tortuous action, or for any breach of warranty or representation of the products or merchandise where the name or logo of the University appears and will indemnify De La Salle University, its officers and employees for any such liability or damage if sought or imposed. Non-licensable uses The following uses of the name or logo of the University will not be allowed: Official Stationery including but not limited to University letterhead, business cards and institutional cards; and Official documents including but not limited to certificates of recognition bearing the name and seal of De La Salle University. 303 Prohibited uses The use of the name or logo of the University cannot be attached to or affixed on the following items: • Alcoholic beverages including but not limited to distilled alcohol liquors, wines, and malt liquors • Cigars, cigarettes and any kind or form of tobacco products • Dangerous or hazardous products including but not limited to firearms, explosives, dangerous weapons, and fuels • Obscene or disparaging products including but not limited to nude photographs, caricature, poster art, or designs that would tend to lower the reputation or degrade the goodwill of the University as represented by the trademarks • Sexually suggestive products including but not limited to inappropriate slogans imprinted on clothing and the configuration of certain novelty items • Health or health-related products • All staple foods, meats, and any natural agricultural or fishery products • Products that insinuate violence • All types of business names or logos • Partisan political paraphernalia or political activities, political parties or candidates to political office • Services except when approved by STRATCOM in accordance with special requirements applicable to services. 304 APPENDIX O GUIDELINES FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE LASALLIANS’ FIGHT AGAINST DRUGS

(LFAD) DRUG TESTING PROGRAM (DTP) Rationale 1. Educational institutions are mandated by the government through Republic Act (RA) No. 9165, otherwise known as the “Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002”, to develop and implement policies and measures to prevent and combat the use of dangerous drugs; 2. The University supports the prevention and reduction efforts of the government to fight illegal drug use and abuse and its ill effects to humans and society; 3. Incidents or reports of illicit drugs or substances use and abuse among the youth are prevalent and continue to rise. The University must make precautionary measures or proactive approaches to address the concerns related to dangerous drugs; and 4. The government, under Section 6 Letter H of DDB Board Regulation No. 3 Series of 2009 under “Enforcement and Compliance”, encourages institutionalization of drug testing activities in schools/institutions concerned over-and-above the random drug testing program conducted by the government. Purposes of the LFAD Drug Testing 1. To identify drug use among the students and help them by providing appropriate intervention/s; 2. To prevent or discourage experimentation and use of illegal substances among the students; and 3. To assess the effectivity and strengthen the drug prevention initiatives and activities of the University. Definition of Terms For purposes of this guideline, the definition of terms used in the Dangerous Drugs Board Regulations No. 6 series of 2003 and No. 3 series of 2009, as implemented by CHED Memorandum Orders (CMOs) No. 19 series of 2003 and No. 25 series of 2009, shall be adopted. 305 Drug Testing Center and Site The drug screening of students will be conducted by a DOH-accredited Testing Center, to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of the test results. The specimen collection shall be done in DLSU campus and its satellite campuses. Expenses The Office of Student Affairs (OSA) shall designate the drug testing laboratory that shall be utilized for the purposes of the program. Payment of testing fee shall be initially borne by the University. LFAD DTP Procedure All students will undergo drug testing as part of the LFAD-DTP. The conduct of the Drug testing will be part of the Annual Physical Exam. For its first year of implementation, ID 115 students will undergo random drug testing scheduled anytime within the AY 2015-2016. Starting AY 2016-2017, all students will undergo drug testing scheduled anytime within the current academic year. Incoming frosh will be required to submit drug test results part of their pre- enrollment medical examination. For the random selection of students, the following procedure which is patterned after the DDB Board Regulations No. 6 series of 2003 and No. 3 series of 2009 with some modification will be followed: 1. Notification a. All incoming frosh and their parents shall be notified of the process and manner by which the random drug screening shall be conducted through the Drug Testing Waiver Form (Please see Annex A). Failure to return the acknowledgement receipt of the notice shall not be a bar to the conduct of

the drug testing. The University, through the SDFO, shall ensure to keep all the acknowledgement receipt of all the notices as proof of service. b. A general announcement on LFAD Drug Testing Program will be published in the DLSU Student Handbook and primers and released to the Lasallian community via DLSU official website and social networking sites. Randomly selected students will be informed by the SDFO of their inclusion in the drug testing through a notice or letter (Please see Annex B) on the scheduled date of drug testing. Likewise, concerned faculty will be notified through email and formal letter (Please see Annex C). 306 2. LFAD DTP Selection Board, Target Samples and Process (only for students in their first year) a. Composition and specific duties and responsibilities of the LFAD RDT Selection Board are as follows: Dean of Student Affairs – acts as Drug Testing Coordinator (DTC) and Chairperson of the Selection Board; convenes and presides the LFAD DTP Selection Board meetings; and handles the conference of the parents or guardians and students who may be found positive of the use of dangerous drugs Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO) Director/ Representative – assists the DTC in his/ her duties and responsibilities; handles the logistic requirements of the RDT; supervises the conduct of the RDT; distributes notices of RDT to selected students; and fetches the students from their classes during the scheduled RDT Office of Counseling and Career Services (OCCS) Director/ Representative – handles the counseling- related concerns of students of the RDT University Registrar/OUR Representative – provides the official student population for a given period and class schedules of randomly selected students Health Services Office (HSO) Director/ Representative – handles all the health services- related concerns of the RDT Information and Technology Services (ITS) Director/ Representative – handles the random selection of students and provides the computer facilities to be used for the RDT Association of Faculty and Educators of DLSU (AFED) President/Representative - assists the LFAD DTP Selection Board in its information dissemination activities for all faculty University Student Government (USG) President/ Representative - assists the LFAD DTP Selection 307 Board in its information dissemination activities for all students Parents of University Students Office (PUSO) President/ Representative – assists the LFAD DTP Selection Board in its information dissemination activities for all parents b. The Selection Board shall ensure the integrity and confidentiality of the random selection process. c. The Selection Board shall meet to prepare and plan the conduct of the LFAD RDT and to determine the schedules and sample target (e.g. .5% or 1 % of the total student population per term) of the random drug testing at the beginning of the academic year. d. The Selection Board shall be convened by the DTC to conduct an orientation on their specific roles and responsibilities for the LFAD RDT and determine the actual names of students who will undergo the drug testing within seven (7) working days prior to the scheduled random drug testing. e. The selection shall

be randomly made by the ITS through lottery, which may be computerized or in any other manner that shall be agreed upon by the Selection Board. f. The random drug testing for students will be done anytime within the academic year. 3. Collection of Urine Specimens The Health Care Center shall follow the DOH-prescribed guidelines in the collection of urine specimens. Universal precautions shall be observed at all times. DOH Prescribed Guidelines shall be posted in strategic places/visible areas of the University. a. The selected students shall be requested to accomplish a drug testing form (Please see Annex D). They must declare the prescription medicines, vitamins, and food supplements that they had ingested within the past five (5) days. b. Students who are prepared to give urine specimens shall approach the analyst table and select a specimen bottle. c. The student will be accompanied by a specimen collector of the same gender to the collection site to safeguard the integrity of the urine sample. 308 d. The student will be asked to empty his/her pockets, remove outer garments if any (such as blazer, jacket, vest, etc.) and to thoroughly wash and dry hands. A body search may be done when necessary. e. After checking of urine sample and sealing the specimen bottle by the specimen collector, the student affixes his/her signature, date and time of collection to the “sealing tape”. f. The specimen collector and the student affix final signatures in the drug testing form attesting to the validity of the procedures done. 4. Treatment of Drug Test Results a. The results of the test shall be strictly confidential. The University shall not publish nor post results whether positive or negative. b. Any person who violates the rules of confidentiality of the results and selection shall be liable under Section 72 of RA 9165 and such other appropriate laws, including administrative sanctions as per the DLSU Student Handbook and Operations Manual. c. The students with negative results shall be provided with an individual copy of their drug screening results. d. In case the test results are positive at the screening level, the following shall be observed: i. The same specimen shall immediately be submitted for confirmatory test observing all strict chain of custody procedures and confidentiality of records; and ii. The DTC shall inform in writing both the students and their parents or legal guardians that a confirmatory test shall be conducted. iii. The results of the confirmatory test shall be transmitted by the laboratory in a sealed envelope and forwarded directly to the DTC. e. If a student is “confirmed” negative from dangerous drug use, the DTC shall individually inform each student and parent concerned regarding the results. 309 f. If a student is “confirmed” positive or using a dangerous drug, the following shall be observed: i. The results of the confirmatory test shall be transmitted by the laboratory in a sealed envelope and forwarded directly to the DTC; ii. The DTC shall then inform in writing both the

student and his/her parent/s or legal guardian of the results and how the information is regarded with utmost secrecy and confidentiality. iii. The DTC shall prepare and invite the student and his/her parent/s or guardian for a conference to discuss issues of drug use and appropriate intervention/s or treatment plan. iv. The DTC may refer the student and his/her parent to a DOH-accredited facility or physician to determine the student’s dependency level. v. Positive confirmatory drug test result shall not be a ground for any disciplinary action against the student and should not be reflected in any of his/ her academic records. Under no circumstances shall the results be used to incriminate the student for further legal action which may result to administrative/civil/criminal liabilities. g. The student shall then undergo the prescribed intervention program under the supervision of the DOH- accredited facility or physician, or private practitioner, or school based program in consultation with parents or guardian. Such process of observation and counseling shall be done in coordination with the Drug Counselor of the University/ Office of Counseling and Career Services (OCCS). The student may be asked to file for a Leave of Absence if necessary. h. If another drug testing is conducted for another period and the student is found positive the second time or shows no sign of improvement or recovery, the University may place the student under a one (1) term observation and counseling period with OCCS or require the student to file a leave of absence (LOA) in consultation with the parent/s or guardian or proceed in accordance with Section 61 of RA 9165. 310 i. If the parents or guardian refuse to act, the University shall process in accordance to Sec. 61, entitled, Compulsory Confinement of a Drug Dependent Who Refuses to Apply Under the Voluntary Submission Program, of RA 9165 without prejudice to the provision of Section 73, entitled, Liability of a Parent, Spouse or Guardian Who Refuses to Cooperate with the Board or any Concerned Agency of RA 9165. j. The DTC shall submit reports on drug testing activity initiated by the University to the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for proper accreditation of the Department of Health (DOH). 5. Enforcement of Compliance a. The SDFO is mandated to monitor the compliance of the students to the LFAD RDT. b. Students who refuse to undergo drug testing shall be dealt with in accordance with the rules and regulations of the University; provided that at no time refusal to undergo testing shall not give rise to a presumption of drug use or dependency; provided further that the school may implement interventions on such refusal other than the offense of drug use or dependency. DANGEROUS DRUGS BOARD BOARD REGULATION NO. 6 Series of 2003 SUBJECT: General Guidelines for the Conduct of Random Drug Testing for Secondary and Tertiary Students Pursuant to Section 36 (c), Article III of Republic Act No. 9165, the following guidelines are hereby promulgated. The guidelines shall be applicable to the random

drug testing of students in public and private secondary, tertiary /higher education institutions and post-secondary technical vocational schools. These guidelines outline the purposes of the random drug-testing program, as well as procedures and necessary consequences of a positive drug test result after confirmation. All procedures undertaken shall take into account the ideals of fairness and rehabilitation and not isolation of the drug dependent. The school must not violate the constitutional rights to due process, equal protection and self- incrimination. 311 GUIDING PRINCIPLES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF RANDOM DRUG TESTING IN SCHOOLS AND MANAGEMENT OF DRUG TEST RESULTS 1. Government recognizes the primary responsibility of the family, particularly the parents, for the education and awareness of its members of the ill effects of dangerous drugs. 2. Parental involvement shall be maximized in the implementation of drug education, random drug testing, treatment, and rehabilitation of drug users and dependents. 3. The school, with the assistance of Local Government Units (LGUs) and other agencies where the school is located, has the obligation to employ every reasonable means to provide a healthy and drug free environment to its populace. 4. Cognizant of the right of the students to continue and complete their studies, the government and the schools shall give emphasis to the implementation of measures aimed at guidance and counseling together with the treatment and rehabilitation of any student found to have used or to be dependent on dangerous drugs. 5. Academic freedom of institutions of higher learning shall be respected in the implementation of random drug testing and all other pertinent provisions of RA 9165. 6. The implementation of drug abuse prevention and education programs in schools shall be intensified as an integral part of the overall demand reduction efforts of the government. 7. The random drug testing shall be implemented as a collaborative undertaking of the government, the schools, the students and their parents. The whole process shall not in any manner be utilized to harass the students. 8. Random drug testing shall be implemented primarily for prevention and rehabilitation. 9. The drug testing program shall guarantee and respect the personal privacy and dignity of the student. 10. The drug test results shall be treated with utmost confidentiality. 11. The test results shall not be used in any criminal proceedings. PURPOSES OF RANDOM DRUG TESTING 1. To determine the prevalence of drug users among the students 312 2. To assess the effectivity of school-based and community-based prevention programs 3. To deter the use of illegal drugs 4. To facilitate the rehabilitation of drug users and dependents 5. To strengthen the collaboration efforts of identified agencies against the use of illegal drugs and in the rehabilitation of drug users and dependents DEFINITION OF TERMS “Drug Counselor” shall mean a person trained in the techniques of guidance counseling particularly dealing with cases of drug dependency. The Drug Testing Coordinator shall designate one such person. “Drug Testing Coordinator” shall be the point person in the school tasked with handling random drug testing which shall

be the principal of a secondary school, the administrator of a technical vocational education and training institution or the administrator appointed by the president/ chief executive officer in tertiary institutions. “Parents” shall, for purposes of these guidelines, include court appointed guardians. “Random selection” refers to the unbiased process of selecting students which are to undergo drug testing. “Rehabilitation” is the dynamic process, including aftercare and follow up treatment, directed towards the physical, emotional/psychological, vocational, social, and spiritual change/enhancement of a drug dependent to enable him to live without dangerous drugs, enjoy the fullest life compatible with his capabilities and potentials and render him to become a law-abiding and productive member of the community. “Schools” shall mean an institution that has as its primary purpose the education of students including secondary, tertiary and technical vocational education and training institutions. 6. “Selection Board” shall be the board constituted at the level of the school composed of the Drug Testing Coordinator as chairperson, one representative each from the students, faculty and parents as members. The authorized governing body duly recognized by their respective constituents shall choose the representatives from these stakeholders based on a set of selection criteria formulated for this purpose. In the absence of a parents’ association, the School Head may appoint any parent who shall be a member of the Selection Board. 313 “Supervising Agency” shall refer to the government agency that exercises supervision over the school such as the Department of Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), or the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA). PROCEDURES IN THE CONDUCT OF RANDOM DRUG TESTING 1. Notification The Supervising Agency through an appropriate order that includes these guidelines on random drug testing, shall inform all schools under its supervision about the government’ actions against illegal drugs. The schools’ administration shall be required to explain these provisions and their procedures to the school community and when applicable, include these in the schools’ handbook or listing of procedures. (The Supervising Agencies’ Memorandum Circulars should include a list of DOH-accredited Testing Centers/ Laboratories.) All students and their parents shall be notified in writing on the process and manner by which the random drug testing shall be conducted. Such notification may be sent at any time during the school term. Failure to return the acknowledgment receipt shall not be a bar to the conduct of the drug testing. 2. Samples a. The Supervising Agency shall inform randomly selected schools on their inclusion in the random drug testing program. b. The whole student population of the school selected shall be included in the random sampling. c. The number of samples should yield a statistical 95% confidence level for the whole student population. 3. Selection of Samples a. The Drug Testing Coordinator shall convene the Selection Board within five days from the receipt of notice from the Supervising Agency stating that the school is included in the program. 314 b. On the day of the testing, the Selection Board shall conduct the random selection of

those to be tested. c. The Selection Board shall ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the random selection process. d. The selection process shall be random through a lottery which may be computerized, or in any other manner that shall be agreed upon by the Board. e. The random selection of students and the drug testing shall be done on the same day. f. Prior to testing, the selected students shall be asked to reveal the prescription medicines, vitamins, food supplements that they had ingested within the past five (5) days. The Drug Testing Coordinator shall keep the listing and utilize this in the evaluation of the confirmatory drug test. g. The laboratory shall follow the DOH prescribed guidelines in the collection of urine specimens. Universal precautions shall be observed at all times. DOH Prescribed Guidelines shall be posted in strategic places/visible areas of the school. h. The monitor assigned to ensure the integrity of the collection process should be of the same sex as the student. i. The drug testing shall be done in the school and conducted by a duly accredited drug-testing laboratory. The school, through its respective health personnel, shall assist the Drug Testing Laboratory in the conduct of the drug testing. j. The Drug Testing Coordinator shall ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the random drug testing for the students, teachers, administration and personnel of the school. It is strongly recommended that the drug testing of the students, teachers, administration and personnel be done simultaneously. 4. Treatment of Random Drug Test Results 315 APPENDIX P IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES FOR DISCIPLINE-RELATED POLICIES ID-related Policies” Students who lost their ID should present an affidavit of loss and request a new ID at the Office of the University Registrar (OUR). A new ID will be issued in three (3) working days. All incidents of lost or left ID and/ or failure to surrender the campus pass within the day will be reported by the Security Office (SO) to the Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO). Students who fail to bring their ID must proceed to any campus gate with ID Terminals. After verification of the student’s identity and status, they will be allowed to enter the campus with a one-day campus pass. The campus pass shall be returned at the end of the day. Failure to surrender the campus pass within the day shall incur a fine of P50.00 for each day that it is not returned. Both the ID and the campus pass shall be immediately regulated. The fines shall be utilized to support the Student Government Assistance Fund (SGAF). Students are responsible for monitoring the number of their ID violations. For every 5th entry into the campus without an ID, the student must immediately report to the SDFO. In DLSU (Manila, Laguna, Makati, and Taguig (BGC) campuses), the ID is part of the school attire and should be visibly worn inside the campus at all times. SDFO Clear-up Drive In accordance with the provision of the Student Handbook. Section

1.19 of the General Directives declares that: “The University acknowledges the right of the students to equal access to available campus space. Benches and tables on campus meant for students shall be accessible to all who wish to use them on a principle of right by physical presence. It is understood that students will occupy only the space they need. No permanent “reservation right” is acknowledged by the University.” The Student Discipline Formation Office (SDFO), in coordination with the Building and Grounds Maintenance Office (BGMO) and the Security Office (SO), strictly implements said University directive to discourage students from leaving their belongings everywhere for 316 their convenience. Based on experience, said habit on the part of our students is not only repugnant to the diligent efforts of the BGMO, but also a strong hindrance for the University to address the problem of losses on campus, mostly committed by students who are behaviorally challenged. For said reason, the SDFO, in coordination with the BGMO and the SO, is conducting a Clear-up Drive at random, several times a month where the belongings of students left unattended in study areas and other areas within the university are being brought to the SDFO Lost and Found and Clearance Section (LFCS) for safekeeping and inventory, subject to the provisions of the Student Handbook. Owners of belongings gathered during the SDFO Clear-Up Drive may claim the same from the SDFO LFCS only during office hours. The office hours of the SDFO LFCS are posted outside the said office. Cleanliness Campaign Pursuant to the Cleanliness Campaign of the University, the following are considered OFFENSES under section 5.3 of the DLSU Student Handbook: 5.3.2.3 Disobeying school regulations and other rules approved by University authorities provided they are properly disseminated to students through official student publications with monthly circulation, through official DLSU website announcements, or both. 5.3.2.7 Littering. 5.3.2.14 Second and succeeding violations of the eating policy wherein eating and drinking other than water in areas designated as a non-eating places such as auditoriums, seminar rooms, classrooms (except light snacks such as biscuits and candies), laboratories, libraries, chapels, and study areas inside the buildings (except SJ study area and Gokongwei lobby). 5.3.2.18 Unhygienic and improper use of University facilities. 5.3.1.2 Vandalism or the deliberate destruction of property belonging to the University or to a member of the faculty, administrator, or co- academic personnel, another student, or to a visitor while on campus. 5.3.1.29 Such other acts as may be determined by University authorities upon consultation with student representatives, provided the application is prospective and properly disseminated to students through official student media, through official DLSU website announcements, or both. 317 Public Display of Physical Intimacy Section 4.8 Social norms of the Student Handbook provides that, The University encourages healthy interaction among students. Students are enjoined to be mindful of others in their surroundings when on campus. They are encouraged to practice utmost self-discipline in order to keep their focus on their learning. Acts or gestures that tend to cause

distraction from learning in the classroom or anywhere on campus will be referred to the SDFO for dialogue and formation. Students are reminded to refrain from acts of lewdness that are prohibited in Section 5.3.1.11. In line with this, they should comply with the implementing guidelines set by the University Student Government (USG), Graduate Student Council (GSC), and the SDFO. Acts of Lewdness Pursuant to the Student Handbook, the following are considered major offenses: 5.3.1.11 Acts of lewdness or commission of any act of immorality such as but not limited to the following: being inside the cubicle of a comfort room with another person regardless of gender and sex; necking or petting; viewing, reading, displaying, or distributing pornographic materials inside the University (unless with SDFO permit and endorsed by the faculty concerned as part of a course requirement), including accessing internet sites that do not correlate to any specific subject or course within the University. Cyber-Related Offenses 5.3.1.37 Commission of any cybercrime offense as defined under Republic Act 10175 or the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012, such as: 5.3.1.37.1 Offenses against the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of computer data and systems (e.g., illegal access, data or system interference, misuse of devices, cybersquatting) 5.3.1.37.2 Computer-related offenses (e.g., forgery, computer fraud, identity theft) 5.3.1.37.3 Content-related offenses: (e.g., cybersex, child pornography, unsolicited commercial communications 5.3.1.37.4 Cyber Libel. (Article 355 of the Revised Penal Code by means of computer system) 5.3.1.37.5 Other offenses (e.g., aiding or abetting cybercrimes) 318 5.4.3 For offenses whose reach is increased because of online visibility, then the Board may impose a higher penalty. Restricted Areas Section 4.7 Social norms of the Student Handbook provides that, Specific rules and markings are posted in classrooms, university libraries, canteens, restrooms, and other facilities under the University’s jurisdiction and should be strictly observed. Further, the areas identified as restricted and identified for specific groups (such as restrooms and faculty areas) must be respected and followed The Student Handbook Sec 5.3.2.21 considers as a minor offense the act of: “Entering any restricted area within the University without prior permission or authority. A restricted area is one that is designated as such by the proper authorities and marked with proper signage.” For this purpose, “restricted areas” are those that are specifically marked with restricted signs and similar notices by respective unit heads of the University. University Jurisdiction Section 5.5.2 Student Discipline Formation of the Student Handbook provides that the term: “University premises’ refers to the territorial boundaries of De La Salle University-Manila, Laguna, and Taguig (BGC) Campuses, including the academic and non-academic buildings and campuses, the parking lots adjacent to it as well as immediate sidewalks within a periphery of five (5) meters from gates, fences or dividing walls of buildings and within a periphery of two hundred (200) meters. The coverage of the 200-meter peripheral University jurisdiction are: (For reference, you may find the actual map in Appendix E): • From Sports Complex to DLSU System Parking Area (Fidel Reyes St.) • From DLSU

Facade to 944 Maligaya St. (after Dagonoy) marked by a post • From South Gate to the street across Starbucks (up to the power source of LRT) • From Biological Garden to front of SMDC Condominium (formerly Harrison Plaza) • In the DLSU-Laguna Campus, this covers the University Drive and adjacent open spaces surrounding the campus. • In the Taguig (BGC) Campus, this covers the University Drive and adjacent open spaces surrounding the campus. 319 The following offenses are considered within the territorial boundaries of the University: 5.5.2.1 Brawls, as defined in Section 5.3.1.5; 5.5.2.2 Inflicting physical injuries on another, as defined in Section 5.3.1.6; 5.5.2.3 Unauthorized bringing in, carrying, possession, or use of drugs or chemicals as defined in Section 5.3.1.7; 5.5.2.4 Vandalism or destruction of property belonging to another, as defined in Section 5.3.1.2; 5.5.2.5 Direct assault as defined in Section 5.3.1.6; 5.5.2.6 Threatening another as defined in Section 5.3.1.10; 5.5.2.7 Unjust enrichment as defined in Section 5.3.1.13; 5.5.2.8 Making sexual advances as defined in Section 5.3.1.26; 5.5.2.9 Gambling as defined in Section 5.3.1.16; 5.5.2.10 Drinking of liquor or alcoholic beverages in public establishments; 5.5.2.11 Rape, any form of sexual assault, or abuse (as defined in the Republic Act 8353 or the Anti-Rape Law of 1997 and the Republic Act 9262 or the Anti-Violence Against Women and Children as defined in Section 5.3.1.33; 5.5.2.12 Act that causes emotional and psychological distress such as but not limited to annoyance or mischief (Unjust vexation as defined in Article 287 of Revised Penal Code) as defined in Section 5.3.1.34; 5.5.2.13 Any act of facilitating, recruiting, or soliciting support for an unrecognized organization that subscribes or participates in any illegal act or that violates any University policy. 320 Formal Hearing Before the Board 321 Handling Discipline Cases with Mental Health Concerns 322 APPENDIX Q THEATER DECORUM DURING PERFORMANCES AND FORMAL CONFERENCES Lasallians are expected to keep in mind common courtesy for the speakers and performers, as well as for fellow audience members during performances and formal conferences. Below are a few reminders to observe during such events inside and outside the university: 1. The audience is expected to dress appropriately in professional or dignified attire. The dress code may be specified in any given performance however it should comply with the University Attire Policy. 2. Children below four (4) years old are welcome only at predetermined events unless explicitly waived by the organizers. The management may ask patrons with children to leave the theater in the event of disturbances. 3. The audience is advised to arrive thirty (30) minutes before curtain time. Latecomers will be admitted by the ushers at appropriate breaks only, depending on the type and nature of the event. For paid performances, no refunds will be made for patrons arriving late. 4. No smoking, eating, or drinking in the auditorium. 5. Flowers should be left with the ushers in the theatre lobby. 6. The use of cellular phone units, radio transceivers, electronic tablets, laptops, small audio players, laser pointers,

and similar gadgets are not allowed in the theater. 7. The audience should keep their feet on the floor, not on the seat or balcony in front of him/her. 8. The audience is expected to behave properly by not making unnecessary sounds during the performance (i.e. talking, whispering, loud coughing, or clearing of the throat). 9. If an audience member must leave during a performance or a speech, she/he is requested to wait until applause between pieces or a substantial “break” in the performance or speech. 10. Taking photographs or video/audio recordings during the performance is strictly prohibited unless authorized by the organizers. 323 11. Performers and speakers appreciate enthusiastic applause, but not whistling or shouting unless it is “Brava” or “Bravo”. 12. Rock concerts or street dance concerts prompt whistling and shouting, but not for formal concerts and conferences. 13. Unauthorized persons are forbidden from going into the dressing rooms, technical booth or orchestra pit before, during, and after performances. 14. Admission into the auditorium is only up to seating capacity. Standing Room Only admission is strictly not allowed. 15. The audience is requested to leave only after the curtain call or formal closing of a conference. 16. The organizers reserve the right to refuse admission or ask an audience member to leave the theater for the cause. 324 APPENDIX R MEMORANDUM ON DROPPING OF MODULAR ACCOUNTANCY COURSES 21 June 2007 MEMORANDUM: TO : Dr. Myrna S.Austria, Dean, College of Business and Economics Atty. Christopher E. Cruz, Vice Dean, College of Business and Economics Dr. Corazon C. Subido, Chair, Accountancy Department Mr. Edwin P. Santiago, University Registrar FROM : Dr. Julius B. Maridable Vice Chancellor for Academics SUBJECT: DROPPING OF MODULAR ACCOUNTANCY COURSES The Student Handbook provides that undergraduate students may drop courses up to the fourth week of the term. However, given that the schedules of the start and end of Accountancy modular courses do not conform to the University’s regular schedules, the following guidelines are exclusively adopted in connection with these courses: 1. Students may drop modular Accountancy courses up to Day 3 only of the modular class. This deadline for dropping applies to all modular classes, including those which start and end within the university dropping period. An officially- dropped course will not appear in the records of the student for the term during which it was dropped. 2. Refunds for dropped course(s) will follow the CHED- approved policies governing refunds. Thus, for purposes of modular accountancy courses, refunds shall only be available if the course is dropped within the first two (2) weeks of the term. 325 3. Therefore, a student dropping a modular course after this period shall not be entitled to any refund. The applicable percentages for refund adopted by the university shall remain. 4. To drop a modular course, the student informs the Chair of the Accountancy Department in writing. Thereafter, not later than Day 4 of the modular class schedule, the Chair of the Accountancy Department informs the Office of the

University Registrar (OUR) through a memorandum endorsed by the Vice Dean.The memorandum shall contain the list of students, their ID numbers and the specific courses to be dropped. The original Enrollment Assessment Form / Student Enrollment Record of the concerned students must be attached. 5. The dropping of courses shall be considered final and official only upon confirmation by the OUR. A revised Enrollment Assessment Form / Student Enrollment Record shall be transmitted to the department not later than Day 5 of the modular class schedule. 6. Other courses required and taken by the Accountancy students which are not modular in character and classification are not covered by these guidelines. As such, the usual policies and procedures governing dropping of other courses shall be applicable to them. 7. These guidelines shall take effect starting SY2007-08, Term 2. 326 APPENDIX S STUDENT MEDIA Student media at De La Salle University aims to inform and eventually engage the students and other sectors of the University to a meaningful discourse and action. Involvement in student media provides students with practical experiences that will enable them to become campus journalists who keep Lasallian core values in mind and take craft proficiency to heart. Aligned with the tenets of responsible journalism, student media allows students to enhance both their personal and intellectual development. 1.1 Definition of Terms 1.1.1 “Student Media” shall refer to any form of media (i.e. printed and electronic online) produced by students for publication, TV and radio broadcast, distribution, dissemination or otherwise communication on or from the campus of the University. 1.1.2 “Student Publications”, based on the Campus Journalism Act of 1991 (Republic Act 7079), shall refer to any printed material that is independently published by, and which meets the needs and interests of, the students. This includes newspapers, magazines, newsletters, periodicals, handouts, or other publications whether printed, mimeographed, or photocopied, published by students for campus circulation. 1.1.3 “Student Media Group” shall refer to any recognized editorial board (including its staff members) of any association involved in student media. It may be a group in itself (i.e. a major student media group) or may be part of a sponsoring student organization 1.1.4 or government (i.e. a minor student media group). Duly supervised by the Student Media Office (SMO), only such groups shall be allowed to produce any form of student media on or from the campus of the University. 1.1.5 “Minor Student Media Group” shall refer to any group involved in student media circulated organization- wide. This kind of group usually belongs to any student organization or student government recognized by the Student Leadership Involvement, Formation and Empowerment (Student LIFE) or other colleges, offices and units within the University. SMO assists these groups 327 by providing technical assistance (i.e. layout and graphic design assessment, and workshops for writing, editing, and proofreading). 1.2 22.2 Accreditation of a Major Student Media Group 1.2.1 The following requirements should be submitted by a student media group-applicant to the Student Media Office by the first week of

Term 1 prior to the opening of classes to obtain official recognition: 1.2.2 Certificate of recognition from the college, office or unit it is affiliated; 1.2.3 A proposal that outlines the following: 1.2.3.1 Purpose and nature of the student media group; 1.2.3.2 Proposed contents of the communication material/s; 1.2.3.3 Proposed platforms to be used; 1.2.3.4 Number of copies to be printed and circulated; and frequency of broadcast or content release; 1.2.3.5 List of editorial or executive board members (including their CGPA and Certificate of Good Moral Conduct from the Student Discipline Formation Office); 1.2.3.6 Student Media Group activity calendar; and Budget plan. 1.3 Accreditation of a Minor Student Media Publication The following requirements should be submitted by a minor student media publication-applicant to the Student Media Office by the first week of Term 1 or prior to the opening of classes to obtain official recognition: 1.3.1 Certificate of recognition from the college, office or unit it is affiliated; 1.3.2 A proposal that outlines the following: 1.3.2.1 Purpose and nature of the student media publication; 1.3.2.2 roposed contents of the communication 328 material/s; 1.3.2.3 Proposed platforms to be used; and 1.4 Circulation Calendar Funding of a Student Media Group Any student media group may use the existing funds of an organization for the printing, publication, broadcast, distribution or dissemination of any communication material. 1.5 Circulation of Unrecognized Groups or Individuals Circulation of publications (and broadcast groups) by unrecognized organizations, groups or individuals must have the prior approval of the Dean of Student Affairs, upon the recommendation of the Director of Student Media. 1.6 Distribution of Communication Materials Circulation of publications (and broadcast groups) by unrecognized organizations, groups or individuals must have the prior approval of the Dean of Student Affairs, upon the recommendation of the Director of Student Media. 1.7 Dealing with Suppliers All Student Media groups shall comply with the procurement and accounting policies of the University. The provisions to this will have to be considered by the University. 1.8 Application for an Editorial or Executive Board Position 1.8.1 Major student media groups shall conduct competitive examinations in accordance with the guidelines stated on the Campus Journalism Act of 1991, the DLSU Student Handbook, the student media groups by laws, and supervised by their respective outgoing or executive editorial board members. 1.8.2 Application for an Editorial or Executive Board Position in a Major Student Media Group Applicants for the available posts of the editorial or executive board of any major student media group should: 1.8.2.1 Have at least one-year residence in the major student media group prior to their assumption of office; 329 1.8.2.2 Be in good academic standing with a CGPA of at least 2.000 throughout their stay in the University (by assumption of office); 1.8.2.3 Obtain clearance from the Student Discipline Formation Office certifying that they have not incurred a major offense or have pending major disciplinary case throughout their stay in the University. 1.8.2.4 Should have one full academic year remaining in which they are in office.

Graduating students may enroll in fewer than 12 units. 1.8.2.5 Should not hold office in any executive capacity in any other official or minor student media group or any recognized student organization while they are still members of the editorial or executive board of any major student media group. 1.8.2.5.1 Any editorial board member of any major student media group who intends to run for a position in the University Student Government or the Council of Student Organizations for the following academic year should assist the Coordinator for Training and Operations in preparing and implementing media and journalism workshops. 1.8.3 Application for an Editorial or Executive Board Position in a Minor Student Media Group Minor student media groups may select their editorial or executive boards through elections or appointments according to their preference. 1.9 Student Media Council The Student Media Council envisions itself as an empowered body composed of student leaders, visible through concrete action, duly recognized by the Lasallian community. It aims to be the benchmark of student publication and media management among universities and colleges in the Philippines. 1.9.1 The Student Media Council (SMC) shall be composed of the top editorial/executive board members of each major 330 student media group. The Director of Student Media shall supervise its operations. 1.9.2 The Council members shall select among themselves the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Public Relations Officer, Secretary, Treasurer, and Events Manager from among the top editorial/executive present in accordance with the guidelines specified by the Student Media Council (SMC). 1.9.3 The Student Media Council shall have the following responsibilities: 1.9.3.1 Ensure that all guidelines for student media groups are implemented; 1.9.3.2 Recommend to the Student Affairs Council revisions to rules and regulations covering student media and other relevant topics on the Student Handbook; 1.9.3.3 Assess the performance of various student media groups and provide recommendations for their improvement; Assist the Coordinator for Training and Operations in preparing and implementing media and journalism workshops and other related; Determine the criteria for the selection of the editorial or executive staff of the major student media groups; projects; 1.9.3.4 Meet at least once a month (more often when necessary); and 1.9.3.5 Receive, investigate, and decide, together with the Director of Student Media, complaints from any aggrieved member of the community. If contested, the Student Media Council shall review the decision. 1.9.3.5.1 Complaint letters from any member of the academic community should be addressed to the Chairperson of the Student Media Council. 1.10 Editorial or Executive Screening Board 1.10.1 The Editorial or Executive Screening Board shall be composed of the following: 331 1.10.1.1 Director of Student Media; 1.10.1.2 Coordinator of Student Media; 1.10.1.3 Incumbent top officers; and 1.10.1.4 The faculty adviser. 1.10.2 If any of the outgoing top editors will run for a position for the next academic year, the other outgoing editors or officers may assign a representative, preferably a former top editor or officer, as a replacement. 1.10.3 The Editorial or Executive Screening Board shall have the following responsibilities: 1.10.3.1 Determine the criteria

for the selection of the editorial or Executive staff of the major student media groups; 1.10.3.2 Prescribe the manner and procedure for the implementation of the editorial examinations; 1.10.3.3 Prescribe the criteria and manner in the selection of the Editorial or Executive Examiners Board by the Director of Student Media; and 1.10.3.4 Appoint students who will assist in the conduct of the editorial examinations. 1.11 Editorial or Executive Examiners Board 1.11.1 The Editorial or Executive Examiners Board shall be composed of the following: 1.11.1.1 Incumbent editors or officers of the student media group concerned who are not running for any position in the following academic year; and 1.11.1.2 Corresponding number of practitioners in journalism, creative writing, broadcasting, and related fields duly appointed by the current editorial or executive board. 1.11.2 The board shall have the following responsibilities: 1.11.2.1 Evaluate and select the incoming editorial or executive staff based on clearly established criteria and properly promulgated procedures. 332 1.11.2.2 Formulate questions for the written and/or oral examinations; and 1.11.2.3 Check examination papers and present the results of the examinations to the Editorial or Executive Screening Board. 1.12 Selection of Staff Members 1.12.1 Staff members shall be selected by the editorial or executive board based on proficiency and competence through competitive examinations and interviews to be conducted by the editorial or executive board of the student media group, headed by the Associate Editor or Vice President for Internals. 1.12.2 Applicants should meet the following requirements: 1.12.2.1 Obtain clearance from the Student Discipline Formation Office certifying that they have not incurred a major offense or have pending major disciplinary case throughout their stay in the University; and 1.12.2.2 Not be an officer or member of any political party (with an exemption for Green & White and Malate Literary Folio staff members). 1.12.3 Staff members should maintain their status as bonafide students of the University to retain their membership in the student media group. 1.12.4 Staff members shall be classified as either regular or probationary based on the length of time of active membership set by each editorial or executive board. 1.13 Allocation of Duties and Responsibilities 1.13.1 Schedule of Circulation, Broadcast or Release Major student media groups shall publish and circulate their communication materials for the University following this schedule: 1.13.1.1 The LaSallian: every first week of the month within each term; 1.13.1.2 Ang Pahayagang Plaridel: every third week of the month within each term; 333 1.13.1.3 The Malate Literary Folio: one week* before the end of each term; and 1.13.1.4 Green & White: annually and released by the third month after the last commencement exercise of the academic year. 1.13.1.5 Green Giant FM schedule of broadcast is determined by the Executive Board and approved by SMO Director. 1.13.1.6 Archers Network releases one (1) video per month and bi-monthly broadcasts. 1.13.1.7 Releases of special issues are not covered in the said schedule 1.13.2 All monetary disbursements should be approved by the Managing Editor, Vice President for Externals, or Station Manager of any major

student media group. Only the signature of the Editor in Chief or President, duly noted by the Director of Student Media, will validate the requisition. In the absence of the editor in chief or president, the signature of the second in line, usually the Associate Editor or Vice President for Internals, with a reasonable explanation for the proxy, shall suffice. 1.13.3 The Managing Editor, Vice President for Externals, or Station Manager should support all payment requisitions with official receipts to be submitted to the Director of Student Media. 1.13.4 All office supply purchases should be recorded and accounted for by the Managing Editor, Vice President for Externals, Station Manager, or the office manager. 1.13.5 Editorial or Executive board members and their staff are the only ones who may use the facilities belonging to the major student media groups. Equipment and supplies may not be taken out of their respective offices, except during out-of-campus presswork. 1.13.6 The Editorial or Executive Board and the office manager will determine office rules and policies by the major student media groups. It is the responsibility of each major student media group to ensure that its staffers know the existence of such rules. 334 1.14 Student Media Grievance Committee 1.14.1 The Student Media Grievance Committee shall have the appellate jurisdiction over the decision of the Student Media Council and the Director of Student Media. 1.14.2 The Student Media Grievance Committee shall be composed of the following: 1. The Dean of Student Affairs as the Chair; 2. An administration representative; 3. A faculty representative; and 4. A student representative. 1.14.3 The Dean of Student Affairs shall convene the Committee and define the procedures to be followed in the conduct of the review 1.14.4 The proceedings before the Student Media Grievance Committee shall be without prejudice to the filing of any criminal case under the Revised Penal Code and other existing laws. 1.15 Policy on Professional Journalism 1.15.1 Student media groups shall enjoy the right to freely and responsibly publish articles, opinions, and other works, guided by the Campus Journalism Act of 1992 (RA 7079) and the University Mission Statement, without any undue influence or threat. 1.15.2 Student media groups shall be subject to all the provisions of the law pertaining to mass media. The student media groups shall be fully and solely responsible for materials they publish. 1.15.3 Complaints against any member of the academic community may be published following the existing student media group policies. For cases with ongoing investigations, only the facts and not the merits of the case may be published. Published articles must be well researched and balanced. 1.15.4 All stories, editorial, photographs, illustrations, video and audio published in communication materials should carry bylines, credit lines, or taglines. The editorial or executive 335 board of the student media group shall be held fully and solely responsible for materials appearing without credit. 1.15.5 Staff members must use an audio recorder during interviews. Interviewees have the right to keep their statement from being audibly recorded.

Interviewees may also request for a copy of the transcript and approve it to ensure that the statements are accurate. The staff member must comply if the interviewee requested some facts to remain off the record. 1.15.6 All stories, editorials, photographs, illustrations, video and audio scheduled for distribution through any communication material produced by any major student media group may not be shown to anyone besides its staff members. 1.15.6.1 Any leakage prior to the communications material’s release must be reported to the Director of the Student Media for investigation. 336 APPENDIX T LIST OF RELEVANT REPUBLIC ACTS AND GOVERNMENT-MANDATED POLICIES 1. Republic Act No. 11036 - Mental Health Act 2. Republic Act No. 7877 - Anti Sexual Harassment Act 3. Republic Act No. 111313 - Safe Spaces Act 4. Republic Act No. 10627 - Anti-Bullying Act 5. Republic Act No. 11053 - Anti Hazing Act of 2018 6. Republic Act No. 8049 - An Act Regulating Hazing and Other Forms of Initiation Rites 7. Republic Act No. 7079 - Campus Journalism Act 8. Republic Act No. 10173 - Data Privacy Act 9. Republic Act No. 10175 - Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012 10. CHED Memorandum Order No. 64 Policies, Guidelines and Procedures for Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) Requiring Drug Testing of Students 11. CHED Memorandum Order No. 18 Implementing Guidelines for the Conduct of Drug Testing of Students in All Higher Education Institutions 12. Dangerous Drugs Board Regulation No. 6 General Guidelines for the Conduct of Random Drug Testing for Secondary and Tertiary Students 337 STUDENT HANDBOOK REVISION COMMITTEE 2021-2025 Chair: Dr. Christine Joy Ballada Dean of Student Affairs University Student Government: Mr. Lance Isiah Dela Cruz Ms. Maegan Angela Ragudo Ms. Ma. Giorgina Escoto Ms. Britney May Paderes Council of Student Organizations: Ms. Angel Smayl Sesante Mr. Juan Lorenzo Mercado Graduate Student Council: Ms. Jerilou Marie Buted Mr. Joshua Miguel Sanchez Faculty: Dr. Antonio Contreras Dr. Shirley Dita Dr. Benito Teehankee Administration: Dr. Jonathan Dungca Dr. Marites Tiongco Dr. Rafael Cabredo Dr. Emelina Sarreal Dr. Ron Resurreccion Dr. Christopher Que Consultants / Resource Persons: Atty. Christopher Cruz University Legal Counsel Atty. Mike Gerald David Associate University Legal Counsel Dr. Nelson Marcos University Registrar Mr. Michael Millanes Director, Student Discipline Formation Office Mr. Christopher Villanueva Director, Office of Student LIFE Dr. Leandro Loyola Director, College Student Affairs - Laguna 338 Ms. Nelca Leila Villarin Vice-Dean for Student Affairs, School of Innovation and Sustainability Mr. Johnny Perez President, DLSU Employees’ Association Dr. Leni Garcia Faculty Consultant, College of Liberal Arts Dr. Laarni Roque Director, Health Services Office Dr. Estesa Xaris Legaspi Director, Lasallian Center for Inclusion, Diversity, and Well-being Dr. Felicitas Ducusin President, DLSU Parents of University Students Organization Ms. Maria Lourdes Fajardo President, DLSU Parents of University Students Organization Secretariat: Ms. Franz Louise Santos Student Media Office Ms. Diane Genevive Layag Student Discipline Formation Office Ms. Maria Cecilia Renee Moreno, Office of Student Affairs Ms. Annika Nicole Silangcruz University Student Government Ms. Jewel May Carmella Limjoco University Student Government

Ms. Jasmine Paras University Student Government Layout Artists: Ms. Chana Marie Garcia Mr. Miguel Inigo Pabello 339

